<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>てしかたがない</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0460.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【てさしあげる】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0462.xhtml">【でしかない】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x41710">【てしかたがない】</h1><h4 class="info">［Na でしかたがない］</h4><h4 class="info">［A-くてしかたがない］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-てしかたがない］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>公園</rb><rt>こう えん</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>出会</rb><rt>で あ</rt></ruby>って<ruby><rb>以来</rb><rt>い らい</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>のことが<ruby><rb>気</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>になってしかたがない。</span>／<span class="translation">Ever since I met her in the park, I just can’t get her out of my mind.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>この<ruby><rb>映画</rb><rt>えい が</rt></ruby>はみるたびに、<ruby><rb>涙</rb><rt>なみだ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>てしかたがない。</span>／<span class="translation">I just can’t help tearing up every time I watch this movie.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>とか<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>集中</rb><rt>しゅう ちゅう</rt></ruby>しようとしているのだが、<ruby><rb>気</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>散</rb><rt>ち</rt></ruby>ってしかたがない。</span>／<span class="translation">No matter how much I try to concentrate on my work, I just can’t keep my mind from wandering.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>毎日</rb><rt>まい にち</rt></ruby>ひまでしかたがない。</span>／<span class="translation">I have too much time on my hands every day.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>試験</rb><rt>し けん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>合格</rb><rt>ごう かく</rt></ruby>したので、うれしくてしかたがない。</span>／<span class="translation">I couldn’t contain myself after passing the examination.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>台風</rb><rt>たい ふう</rt></ruby>のせいで、あの<ruby><rb>山</rb><rt>やま</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>登</rb><rt>のぼ</rt></ruby>れなかったのが、<ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>でも<ruby><rb>残念</rb><rt>ざん ねん</rt></ruby>でしかたがない。</span>／<span class="translation">I still regret that I couldn’t climb that mountain because of a typhoon.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（7）</span>わたしが<ruby><rb>転職</rb><rt>てん しょく</rt></ruby>したのは、<ruby><rb>前</rb><rt>まえ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>会社</rb><rt>かい しゃ</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>働</rb><rt>はたら</rt></ruby>くのがいやでしかたがなかったからだ。</span>／<span class="translation">The reason I changed jobs was that I just couldn’t stand working at my previous company.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（8）</span><ruby><rb>田中</rb><rt>た なか</rt></ruby>さんは<ruby><rb>孫</rb><rt>まご</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>可愛</rb><rt>かわい</rt></ruby>くて<ruby><rb>仕方</rb><rt>し かた</rt></ruby>がないらしい。</span>／<span class="translation">Apparently Tanaka-san dotes shamelessly on her grandchild.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses an emotion or feeling arising naturally from a source beyond the control of the speaker. Often used to express an irrepressibly strong emotion. Usually preceded by an expression of emotion, feeling, or desire; use of words denoting an attribute or evaluation leads to awkward constructions.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>歌が下手で仕方がない。／Her singing can’t help but be poor.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>歌がとても下手だ。／Her singing is really poor.</div><div class="explanation">In addition to directly expressing emotion or feeling, this construction can also be used in cases when a situation lies beyond the control of the speaker and results in problems or annoyance.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>最近うちの息子は口答えをしてしかたがないんです。／Recently our son has taken to talking back to us and we don’t know what to do.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>年のせいか物忘れをしてしかたがない。／It might just be age, but I’m getting awfully forgetful.</div><div class="explanation">At times が is omitted, resulting in the construction ...てしかたない. In casual conversation, the form ...てしょうがない is also used. For the difference in meaning from てならない, refer to that section.</div></body></html>