<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ところが</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0578.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【どころ】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0580.xhtml">【ところだ】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x54621">【ところが】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x54626"><span class="number">1. </span>ところが〈contrary to prediction〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>天気</rb><rt>てん き</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>予報</rb><rt>よ ほう</rt></ruby>では<ruby><rb>今日</rb><rt>きょう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>雨</rb><rt>あめ</rt></ruby>になると<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>っていた。ところが、<ruby><rb>少</rb><rt>すこ</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>曇</rb><rt>くも</rt></ruby>っただけで、<ruby><rb>結局</rb><rt>けっ きょく</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>降</rb><rt>ふ</rt></ruby>らなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">The weather forecast was for rain today. However, it was only a little cloudy, and we never got any rain after all. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>ダイエットを<ruby><rb>始</rb><rt>はじ</rt></ruby>めて3<ruby><rb>週間</rb><rt>しゅう かん</rt></ruby>になる。ところが、<ruby><rb>減</rb><rt>へ</rt></ruby>った<ruby><rb>体重</rb><rt>たい じゅう</rt></ruby>は、わずか1キロだけだ。</span>／<span class="translation">It’s been three weeks since I started dieting. But I’ve only lost one measly kilogram.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>いつもは8<ruby><rb>時半</rb><rt>じ はん</rt></ruby>ごろ<ruby><rb>会社</rb><rt>かい しゃ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>着</rb><rt>つ</rt></ruby>く。ところが、<ruby><rb>今日</rb><rt>きょう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>交通</rb><rt>こう つう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>事故</rb><rt>じ こ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>巻</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>込</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>まれ、1<ruby><rb>時間遅</rb><rt>じ かん おく</rt></ruby>れで<ruby><rb>到着</rb><rt>とう ちゃく</rt></ruby>した。</span>／<span class="translation">She always gets to work around 8:30 a.m. But today she was involved in a traffic accident and arrived an hour late.  </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>兄</rb><rt>あに</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>大変</rb><rt>たい へん</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>秀才</rb><rt>しゅう さい</rt></ruby>である。ところが<ruby><rb>弟</rb><rt>おとうと</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>だい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>勉強</rb><rt>べん きょう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>嫌</rb><rt>ぎら</rt></ruby>いで、<ruby><rb>高校</rb><rt>こう こう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>無事</rb><rt>ぶ じ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>卒業</rb><rt>そつ ぎょう</rt></ruby>できるかどうかも<ruby><rb>危</rb><rt>あや</rt></ruby>ぶまれている。</span>／<span class="translation">The older brother is really brilliant. On the other hand, the younger brother absolutely hates to study, and there's concern about whether or not he'll even be able to finish high school. </span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>春休</rb><rt>はる やす</rt></ruby>みはゆっくりされているんでしょうね。</span>／<span class="translation">I guess you’re taking it easy this spring vacation, right?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>ところが、<ruby><rb>締</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>め<ruby><rb>切</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>り<ruby><rb>原稿</rb><rt>げん こう</rt></ruby>があってそうもしていられないんです。</span>／<span class="translation">As a matter of fact, I have an article deadline, so I really can't take it easy at all. </span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>来週</rb><rt>らい しゅう</rt></ruby>のパーティには<ruby><rb>是非</rb><rt>ぜ ひ</rt></ruby>いらしてくださいね。</span>／<span class="translation">Please tell me you’ll come to the party next week!</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>ところが、その<ruby><rb>日</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>急</rb><rt>きゅう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>予定</rb><rt>よ てい</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>はい</rt></ruby>ってしまったんです。</span>／<span class="translation">Actually, something unexpected has come up that I have to do that day.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to connect two sentences when the content of the second sentence contradicts or clashes with what is naturally anticipated or expected from the first sentence. Also used when there is a relationship of contrast between two situations, as in (3) and (4). In conversations like (5) and (6), it is used to tell the addressee something like, “That’s what you may think, but the reality is different.” In other words, this usage signals a discrepancy between the other person’s expectations and reality.</div><div class="explanation">In all cases, the sentence after ところが contains an expression that indicates an established fact. Non-factual expressions, including expressions of intention, desire, command, or conjecture, cannot be used. Note the examples of incorrect usage given below.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>合格はかなり難しそうだ。ところが、受験してみるつもりだ（意志）／挑戦してみたい（希望）／頑張れ（命令）／ひょっとしたら受かるかもしれない（推量）。／It looks like it will be difficult to pass. However, I intend to try to take the test. (intention)/...I want to take up the challenge. (desire)/...do your best! (command)/...I might just pass after all. (conjecture)</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x54721"><span class="number">2. </span>ところが〈discovery〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>急</rb><rt>いそ</rt></ruby>いで<ruby><rb>家</rb><rt>いえ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>た。ところが、<ruby><rb>途中</rb><rt>と ちゅう</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>財布</rb><rt>さい ふ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>忘</rb><rt>わす</rt></ruby>れていることに<ruby><rb>気</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>がつき、あわてて<ruby><rb>引</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>返</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>した。</span>／<span class="translation">I left home in a hurry. Then, on the way, I realized I had forgotten my wallet and hurried back. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>友人</rb><rt>ゆう じん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>家</rb><rt>いえ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>電話</rb><rt>でん わ</rt></ruby>した。ところが、1<ruby><rb>週間前</rb><rt>しゅう かん まえ</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>海外旅行</rb><rt>かい がい りょ こう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>って<ruby><rb>留守</rb><rt>る す</rt></ruby>だという。</span>／<span class="translation">I called my friend’s house. But I was told that he’s not home because he’s been out of the country on a trip since a week ago. </span></div><div class="explanation">Used when the speaker is surprised by a new turn of events, or an event that was hard to anticipate from the situation or course of events described in the previous sentence. The sentence after ところが is information newly-discovered by the speaker that contradicts what would naturally be anticipated from the situation described in the previous sentence. </div><div class="explanation">This usage of ところが does not usually allow for substitution with expressions like しかし, けれども, or だが, and when substitution is possible, the meaning of the sentence changes.  </div></body></html>