<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>そう...ない</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0319.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ぜんぜん...ない】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0321.xhtml">【そういえば】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x25061">【そう...ない】</h1><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>夕食</rb><rt>ゆう しょく</rt></ruby>はそうおいしくなかったが<ruby><rb>全部</rb><rt>ぜん ぶ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べた。</span>／<span class="translation">Dinner wasn’t particularly good but I finished it anyway.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>日本語</rb><rt>に ほん ご</rt></ruby>はそうむずかしくないと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>う。</span>／<span class="translation">I don’t think Japanese is that hard.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>松子</rb><rt>まつ こ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>明</rb><rt>あか</rt></ruby>るい<ruby><rb>感</rb><rt>かん</rt></ruby>じの<ruby><rb>子</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>でしたが、クラスではそう<ruby><rb>目立</rb><rt>め だ</rt></ruby>たない<ruby><rb>生徒</rb><rt>せい と</rt></ruby>でした。</span>／<span class="translation">Ma­tsu­ko was a cheerful girl, but she wasn’t a particularly outstanding student in the class.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>このあたりでは<ruby><rb>雪</rb><rt>ゆき</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>学校</rb><rt>がっ こう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>休</rb><rt>やす</rt></ruby>みになるのはそうめずらしいことではない。</span>／<span class="translation">It isn’t so unusual for schools in this area to close because of snow.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “not so much, not very....”</div></body></html>