<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>なくともよい</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0678.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【なくてもいい】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0680.xhtml">【なくもない】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x62598">【なくともよい】</h1><h4 class="info">［N／Na　でなくともよい］</h4><h4 class="info">［A-くなくともよい］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-なくともよい］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>履歴書</rb><rt>り れき しょ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>自筆</rb><rt>じ ひつ</rt></ruby>でなくともよい。ただし、その<ruby><rb>場合</rb><rt>ば あい</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>最後</rb><rt>さい ご</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>押印</rb><rt>おう いん</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>署名</rb><rt>しょ めい</rt></ruby>のこと。</span>／<span class="translation">Your resume does not have to be handwritten. However, if it is not, it must be stamped and signed at the bottom.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>入学式</rb><rt>にゅう がく しき</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>必</rb><rt>かなら</rt></ruby>ずしも<ruby><rb>父母</rb><rt>ふぼ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>同伴</rb><rt>どうはん</rt></ruby>でなくともよい。</span>／<span class="translation">It is not necessary for parents to accompany students to the entrance ceremony.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>支柱</rb><rt>し ちゅう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>強度</rb><rt>きょう ど</rt></ruby>はそれほど<ruby><rb>強</rb><rt>つよ</rt></ruby>くなくともよい。</span>／<span class="translation">The pillar doesn’t have to be that strong.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>委任状</rb><rt>い にん じょう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>提出</rb><rt>てい しゅつ</rt></ruby>すれば、<ruby><rb>必</rb><rt>かなら</rt></ruby>ずしも<ruby><rb>本人</rb><rt>ほん にん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>出席</rb><rt>しゅっ せき</rt></ruby>しなくともよい。</span>／<span class="translation">If a letter of proxy is submitted, the person in question does not necessarily have to attend.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “it is not necessary to do X.” This is a written expression that means the same as なくてもよい／いい, and in modern Japanese it is seldom used, except in formal situations. When combined with the verb する, it may also be used in the form せずともよい.</div></body></html>