<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ていく</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0446.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ていい】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0448.xhtml">【ていけない】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x39412">【ていく】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x39417"><span class="number">1. </span>V-ていく〈manner at time of movement〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>学校</rb><rt>がっ こう</rt></ruby>まで<ruby><rb>走</rb><rt>はし</rt></ruby>っていこう。</span>／<span class="translation">Let’s run (all the way) to school.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>重</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>いタイヤを<ruby><rb>転</rb><rt>ころ</rt></ruby>がしていった。</span>／<span class="translation">I rolled a heavy tire.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby>がないからタクシーに<ruby><rb>乗</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>って<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>きましょう。</span>／<span class="translation">We have no time, so let’s go by taxi.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>トラックは<ruby><rb>急</rb><rt>きゅう</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>坂道</rb><rt>さか みち</rt></ruby>をゆっくり<ruby><rb>登</rb><rt>のぼ</rt></ruby>っていった。</span>／<span class="translation">The truck climbed slowly up the steep road.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses the method of going or what action is taken while going.</div><h4 class="reference">→<a href="part0456.xhtml#idsubtitlex1x40932">【てくる】1</a></h4><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x39462"><span class="number">2. </span>V-ていく〈movement away from something〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>あの<ruby><rb>子</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>友達</rb><rt>とも だち</rt></ruby>とけんかして、<ruby><rb>泣</rb><rt>な</rt></ruby>きながら<ruby><rb>帰</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>っていった。</span>／<span class="translation">That kid had a fight with his friend and went home crying.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>ブーメランは<ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>きな<ruby><rb>弧</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>描</rb><rt>えが</rt></ruby>いて<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>のもとに<ruby><rb>戻</rb><rt>もど</rt></ruby>って<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>きました。</span>／<span class="translation">The boomerang traced a large circle and returned to where he was.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>船</rb><rt>ふね</rt></ruby>はどんどん<ruby><rb>遠</rb><rt>とお</rt></ruby>くに<ruby><rb>離</rb><rt>はな</rt></ruby>れて<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>く。</span>／<span class="translation">The ship is going farther and farther away.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses that something is going or moving away from the speaker.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x39496"><span class="number">3. </span>V-ていく〈successive events〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>あと<ruby><rb>少</rb><rt>すこ</rt></ruby>しだからこの<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>をすませていきます。</span>／<span class="translation">There’s just a little more left to do, so I’ll finish this job and then go.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><span class="number">A:</span>じゃ、<ruby><rb>失礼</rb><rt>しつ れい</rt></ruby>します。</span>／<span class="translation">I’ll leave now.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>そんなこと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>わないで、ぜひうちでご<ruby><rb>飯</rb><rt>はん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べていって<ruby><rb>下</rb><rt>くだ</rt></ruby>さいよ。</span>／<span class="translation">Don’t say that. Please eat with us and then leave.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>疲</rb><rt>つか</rt></ruby>れたからここで<ruby><rb>休</rb><rt>やす</rt></ruby>んで<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>くことにしましょう。</span>／<span class="translation">I’m tired, so let’s rest here and then go on.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>叔母</rb><rt>お ば</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>誕生日</rb><rt>たん じょう び</rt></ruby>だから、<ruby><rb>途中</rb><rt>と ちゅう</rt></ruby>でプレゼントに<ruby><rb>花</rb><rt>はな</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>って<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>きました。</span>／<span class="translation">Because it’s my aunt’s birthday, I bought some flowers on my way.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “going somewhere after doing a certain action.” Expresses a certain action done with the assumption of going somewhere, but the action has more weight than the subsequent act of going.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x39548"><span class="number">4. </span>V-ていく〈duration〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>結婚</rb><rt>けっ こん</rt></ruby>してからも<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>続</rb><rt>つづ</rt></ruby>けていくつもりです。</span>／<span class="translation">I intend to continue working after I get married.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>今後</rb><rt>こん ご</rt></ruby>もわが<ruby><rb>社</rb><rt>しゃ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>発展</rb><rt>はっ てん</rt></ruby>のために<ruby><rb>努力</rb><rt>ど りょく</rt></ruby>していくつもりだ。</span>／<span class="translation">We intend to continue making efforts for the development of our company.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>日本</rb><rt>に ほん</rt></ruby>ではさらに<ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>数</rb><rt>かず</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>減少</rb><rt>げん しょう</rt></ruby>していくことが<ruby><rb>予想</rb><rt>よ そう</rt></ruby>される。</span>／<span class="translation">It is expected that in Japan the number of children is going to decrease even more.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>ている<ruby><rb>間</rb><rt>あいだ</rt></ruby>にもどんどん<ruby><rb>雪</rb><rt>ゆき</rt></ruby>がつもっていく。</span>／<span class="translation">The snow is accumulating more and more even as I watch it.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>その<ruby><rb>映画</rb><rt>えい が</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>評判</rb><rt>ひょう ばん</rt></ruby>になって<ruby><rb>以来</rb><rt>い らい</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>人気</rb><rt>にん き</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>日増</rb><rt>ひ ま</rt></ruby>しに<ruby><rb>高</rb><rt>たか</rt></ruby>まっていった。</span>／<span class="translation">Since becoming famous for that film, her popularity was increasing by the day.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>当分</rb><rt>とう ぶん</rt></ruby>この<ruby><rb>土地</rb><rt>と ち</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>生活</rb><rt>せい かつ</rt></ruby>して<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>こうと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>っている。</span>／<span class="translation">I’m thinking of living in this place for some time to come.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses that a change is progressing or that an action is continuing beyond a certain point in time.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x39600"><span class="number">5. </span>V-ていく〈disappearance〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>この<ruby><rb>学校</rb><rt>がっ こう</rt></ruby>では、<ruby><rb>毎年</rb><rt>まい とし</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>五百</rb><rt>ご ひゃく</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>名</rb><rt>めい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>学生</rb><rt>がく せい</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>卒業</rb><rt>そつ ぎょう</rt></ruby>していく。</span>／<span class="translation">Five hundred students graduate from this school every year.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>てごらん、<ruby><rb>虹</rb><rt>にじ</rt></ruby>がどんどん<ruby><rb>消</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>えていくよ。</span>／<span class="translation">Look, the rainbow is disappearing little by little.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>小</rb><rt>ちい</rt></ruby>さいボートは<ruby><rb>木</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>葉</rb><rt>は</rt></ruby>のように<ruby><rb>渦</rb><rt>うず</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>中</rb><rt>なか</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>沈</rb><rt>しず</rt></ruby>んでいった。</span>／<span class="translation">The small boat sank like a leaf into the whirlpool.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>毎日</rb><rt>まい にち</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>交通</rb><rt>こう つう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>事故</rb><rt>じ こ</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>多</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>くの<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>死</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>んでいく。</span>／<span class="translation">Many people die in traffic accidents every day.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>についても3<ruby><rb>ヶ月</rb><rt>か げつ</rt></ruby>ぐらいで<ruby><rb>辞</rb><rt>や</rt></ruby>めていく<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>多</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>いので<ruby><rb>困</rb><rt>こま</rt></ruby>っている。</span>／<span class="translation">It’s a problem because a lot of people quit work after only about three months.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>英語</rb><rt>えい ご</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>単語</rb><rt>たん ご</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>覚</rb><rt>おぼ</rt></ruby>えようとしているが、<ruby><rb>覚</rb><rt>おぼ</rt></ruby>えたはしから<ruby><rb>忘</rb><rt>わす</rt></ruby>れていく。</span>／<span class="translation">I’m trying to memorize English vocabulary, but I forget it as soon as I learn it.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses that something that existed has disappeared or become more distant from the speaker. </div></body></html>