<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ことには</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0230.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ことになる】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0232.xhtml">【ことは...が】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x18193">【ことには】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x18195"><span class="number">1. </span>V-ることには</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>その<ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>たちの<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>うことには、<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>らの<ruby><rb>両親</rb><rt>りょう しん</rt></ruby>はもう<ruby><rb>二日</rb><rt>ふつか</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>帰</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>ってきていないらしい。</span>／<span class="translation">From what the children say, it appears that their parents have not been home for two days already.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>学生</rb><rt>がく せい</rt></ruby>たちの<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>うことには、ことしは<ruby><rb>就職</rb><rt>しゅう しょく</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>予想</rb><rt>よ そう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>以上</rb><rt>い じょう</rt></ruby>にきびしいらしい。</span>／<span class="translation">From what the students say, it sounds like job-hunting this year is much harder than they had imagined. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>先生</rb><rt>せん せい</rt></ruby>のおっしゃることには、<ruby><rb>最近</rb><rt>さい きん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>学生</rb><rt>がく せい</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>われたことしかしないそうだ。</span>／<span class="translation">According to the professor, students these days do only what they’re told to do. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>たぬきさんの<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>うことにゃ、きつねさんがかぜをひいたそうじゃ。</span>／<span class="translation">What Mr. Raccoon says is that Mr. Fox has caught a cold. </span></div><div class="explanation">Often attached to 言う (say) or to the dictionary form of a similar verb. Specifies the person who made the utterance that is quoted or reported. In (1), it means “those children are saying that their parents haven’t been home for a full two days.” A slightly old-fashioned expression that has the tone of written language; in particular, the form ことにゃ (as shown in (4)) is often used in folktales and the like. </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x18232"><span class="number">2. </span>V-ないことには</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>先生</rb><rt>せん せい</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>ないことにはクラスははじまらない。</span>／<span class="translation">The class cannot start if the teacher doesn’t come. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>いい<ruby><rb>辞書</rb><rt>じ しょ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>手</rb><rt>て</rt></ruby>にいれないことには<ruby><rb>外国語</rb><rt>がい こく ご</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>勉強</rb><rt>べん きょう</rt></ruby>はうまくいかない。</span>／<span class="translation">Studying a foreign language will not go well if you don’t get a good dictionary. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>あなたがこころよく<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>おくってくれないことには、<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>としても<ruby><rb>気持</rb><rt>き も</rt></ruby>ちよく<ruby><rb>出発</rb><rt>しゅっ ぱつ</rt></ruby>できないよ。</span>／<span class="translation">I won’t be able to feel good about leaving if you don’t come willingly to see me off. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>とにかくこの<ruby><rb>予算案</rb><rt>よ さん あん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>国会</rb><rt>こっ かい</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>承認</rb><rt>しょう にん</rt></ruby>されないことには、<ruby><rb>景気回復</rb><rt>けい き かい ふく</rt></ruby>のための<ruby><rb>次</rb><rt>つぎ</rt></ruby>のてだてを<ruby><rb>講</rb><rt>こう</rt></ruby>ずることは<ruby><rb>不可能</rb><rt>ふ か のう</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">Anyway, if this budget proposal is not approved by the Diet, it will be impossible to take the next measures to restore the economy. </span></div><div class="explanation">Used in the pattern XないことにはYない and means that Y cannot be realized without realizing X. X is a necessary condition for the realization of Y. Can be paraphrased with なければ or なくては.</div></body></html>