<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>かぎる</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0115.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【かぎりに】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0117.xhtml">【かくして】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x10862">【かぎる】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x10864"><span class="number">1. </span>...にかぎる</h2><h4 class="info">［Nにかぎる］</h4><h4 class="info">［Na なのにかぎる］</h4><h4 class="info">［Aのにかぎる］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-るにかぎる］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>和菓子</rb><rt>わ が し</rt></ruby>ならこの<ruby><rb>店</rb><rt>みせ</rt></ruby>にかぎる。</span>／<span class="translation">This is really the only shop for Japanese sweets.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>疲</rb><rt>つか</rt></ruby>れた<ruby><rb>時</rb><rt>とき</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>温泉</rb><rt>おん せん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>くにかぎるね。</span>／<span class="translation">Going to a hot spring resort is the thing to do when you are tired, you know.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>せっかくテレビを<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>いかえるのなら、<ruby><rb>画面</rb><rt>が めん</rt></ruby>がきれいなのにかぎる。</span>／<span class="translation">If you’re going to buy a new TV, then it has to be one with good picture quality.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>ヨーロッパを<ruby><rb>旅行</rb><rt>りょ こう</rt></ruby>するなら<ruby><rb>電車</rb><rt>でん しゃ</rt></ruby>にかぎるよ。<ruby><rb>安</rb><rt>やす</rt></ruby>くて<ruby><rb>快適</rb><rt>かい てき</rt></ruby>だしね。</span>／<span class="translation">Train is the only way to travel in Europe. It’s cheap and comfortable.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>家族</rb><rt>か ぞく</rt></ruby>みんなで<ruby><rb>楽</rb><rt>たの</rt></ruby>しみたかったら、ディズニーランドに<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>くに<ruby><rb>限</rb><rt>かぎ</rt></ruby>る。</span>／<span class="translation">If you want to have fun with your whole family, going to Disneyland is best.</span></div><div class="explanation">Asserts that something is the best. Often preceded by a なら or たら clause.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x10915"><span class="number">2. </span>Nにかぎったことではない</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>あの<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>遅刻</rb><rt>ち こく</rt></ruby>するのは<ruby><rb>今日</rb><rt>きょう</rt></ruby>にかぎったことではない。</span>／<span class="translation">Today is not the only day that he’s been late.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>レポートのできが<ruby><rb>悪</rb><rt>わる</rt></ruby>いのはこの<ruby><rb>学生</rb><rt>がく せい</rt></ruby>にかぎったことではない。</span>／<span class="translation">It is not just this student whose reports are poorly written.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>日本</rb><rt>に ほん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>物価</rb><rt>ぶっ か</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>高</rb><rt>たか</rt></ruby>さはなにも<ruby><rb>食料品</rb><rt>しょく りょう ひん</rt></ruby>にかぎったことではない。</span>／<span class="translation">It is not only groceries that are expensive in Japan.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>エンジンの<ruby><rb>故障</rb><rt>こ しょう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>多</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>いのはこの<ruby><rb>車種</rb><rt>しゃ しゅ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>限</rb><rt>かぎ</rt></ruby>ったことではないらしく、<ruby><rb>同</rb><rt>おな</rt></ruby>じメーカーの<ruby><rb>他</rb><rt>ほか</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>車種</rb><rt>しゃ しゅ</rt></ruby>でも<ruby><rb>同</rb><rt>おな</rt></ruby>じようなトラブルが<ruby><rb>起</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>こっているということだ。</span>／<span class="translation">It is not only this model which has had all sorts of engine trouble; other models of this car manufacturer are also having the same sort of trouble.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means that a problem is not limited to just one thing. Generally used with respect to negative matters and expresses that “this applies not only in this case but also in many others.”</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x10952"><span class="number">3. </span>...とはかぎらない<span class="reference">→<a href="part0619.xhtml#idtitlex1x58638">【とはかぎらない】</a></span></h2><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x10959"><span class="number">4. </span>...ともかぎらない<span class="reference">→<a href="part0628.xhtml#idtitlex1x59104">【ともかぎらない】</a></span></h2></body></html>