<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>いずれ1</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0043.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【いじょう】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0045.xhtml">【いずれ<sub class="variation">2</sub>】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x4894">【いずれ<sub class="variation">1</sub>】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x4897"><span class="number">1. </span>いずれ</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>進学</rb><rt>しん がく</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>就職</rb><rt>しゅう しょく</rt></ruby>といずれの<ruby><rb>道</rb><rt>みち</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>選</rb><rt>えら</rt></ruby>ぶのがいいか、<ruby><rb>自分</rb><rt>じ ぶん</rt></ruby>でも<ruby><rb>決</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>めかねている。</span>／<span class="translation">I can’t decide which choice is better, furthering my education or finding a job.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>「はい」「いいえ」「どちらでもない」のいずれかに○をつけてください。</span>／<span class="translation">Please circle one: “Yes,” “No,” or “Neither.”</span></div><div class="explanation">This is a way of saying どちら or どれ using a form more common in written language. It indicates one selection among two or more choices.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x4922"><span class="number">2. </span>いずれにしても</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>山田</rb><rt>やま だ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>都合</rb><rt>つ ごう</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>遅</rb><rt>おく</rt></ruby>れるとは<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>っていたが、いずれにしても<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>ることにはなっている。</span>／<span class="translation">Yamada told me he would be late because of work, but he is going to be coming, at any rate.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>後遺症</rb><rt>こう い しょう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>る<ruby><rb>可能性</rb><rt>か のう せい</rt></ruby>もあるが、いずれにしても<ruby><rb>回復</rb><rt>かい ふく</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>向</rb><rt>む</rt></ruby>かっていることだけは<ruby><rb>確</rb><rt>たし</rt></ruby>かだ。</span>／<span class="translation">There is a chance of lingering complications, but all in all he is definitely recovering.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>辞</rb><rt>や</rt></ruby>めるのがいいのかどうかはわからないが、いずれにしてもこのまま<ruby><rb>放</rb><rt>ほう</rt></ruby>っておくわけにはいかない。</span>／<span class="translation">I’m not sure whether he should resign, but anyhow we can’t just leave things as they are.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><span class="number">A:</span>ここでついでにお<ruby><rb>昼</rb><rt>ひる</rt></ruby>ご<ruby><rb>飯</rb><rt>はん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べましょうか。</span>／<span class="translation">Shall we have lunch here, as long as we’re here anyway?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>そうですね。いずれにしても、どこかで<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べておかなきゃならないんだし。</span>／<span class="translation">Yes, let’s. At any rate, we have to have lunch somewhere.</span></div><div class="explanation">いずれにしても is placed at the beginning of a sentence or clause and expresses  “there are many possibilities to choose from, but anyway no matter which one you choose....” It is used to emphasize that the thing following いずれにしてもis something true or definite. It is used in both spoken and written language. いずれにしろ and いずれにせよ are more formal ways to say this. It can also be reworded as 何にしても. </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x4971"><span class="number">3. </span>いずれにしろ</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>やりたい<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>はいろいろあるが、いずれにしろこんな<ruby><rb>不況</rb><rt>ふ きょう</rt></ruby>では<ruby><rb>希望</rb><rt>き ぼう</rt></ruby>する<ruby><rb>職</rb><rt>しょく</rt></ruby>にはつけそうもない。</span>／<span class="translation">There are lots of jobs I want to do, but having said that, I don’t think I will get one that I want in this recession.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>ちょっと<ruby><rb>来客</rb><rt>らい きゃく</rt></ruby>があったりするかもしれませんが、いずれにしろこの<ruby><rb>日</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby>なら<ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>取</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>れるので<ruby><rb>大丈夫</rb><rt>だい じょう ぶ</rt></ruby>です。</span>／<span class="translation">We might have a visitor or two in for a while, but even so I can make time for you on that day. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>もっといい<ruby><rb>機種</rb><rt>き しゅ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>るまで<ruby><rb>待</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>ってもいいけれど、いずれにしろいつかはパソコンを<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>わなければならないのなら、この<ruby><rb>機会</rb><rt>き かい</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>ってしまったらどうか。</span>／<span class="translation">It’s OK to wait until a better model comes out, but if you have to buy a computer sooner or later, why don’t you take this opportunity to buy one?</span></div><div class="explanation">いずれにしろ is a formal way to sayいずれにしても.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x5002"><span class="number">4. </span>いずれにせよ</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>今日</rb><rt>きょう</rt></ruby>はこの<ruby><rb>問題</rb><rt>もん だい</rt></ruby>にはもう<ruby><rb>触</rb><rt>ふ</rt></ruby>れませんが、いずれにせよ<ruby><rb>今後</rb><rt>こん ご</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>考</rb><rt>かんが</rt></ruby>えていかなければならないとは<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>っています。</span>／<span class="translation">I won’t talk about this problem anymore today, but at any rate, I am thinking  that it has to be considered in the future, too.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>今後</rb><rt>こん ご</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>誰</rb><rt>だれ</rt></ruby>にこのプロジェクトを<ruby><rb>任</rb><rt>まか</rt></ruby>せるかは<ruby><rb>未定</rb><rt>み てい</rt></ruby>だが、いずれにせよ<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>降</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>りてもらうことに<ruby><rb>決</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>めた。</span>／<span class="translation">It hasn’t been decided who will be entrusted with this project, but at any rate, I’ve made up my mind to have him step down.</span></div><div class="explanation">This is a formal way to sayいずれにしても.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x5027"><span class="number">5. </span>いずれも</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>ここにございます<ruby><rb>宝石類</rb><rt>ほう せき るい</rt></ruby>は、いずれも<ruby><rb>最高級品</rb><rt>さい こう きゅう ひん</rt></ruby>でございます。</span>／<span class="translation">The jewelry here is all of the highest quality.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>今日</rb><rt>きょう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>講演会</rb><rt>こう えん かい</rt></ruby>のお<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はなし</rt></ruby>はいずれも<ruby><rb>大変</rb><rt>たい へん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>興味深</rb><rt>きょう み ぶか</rt></ruby>いものでした。</span>／<span class="translation">The lectures today were all very interesting. </span></div><div class="explanation">This is a formal and polite way to sayどちらも or どれも. </div></body></html>