<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>について</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0806.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【にちがいない】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0808.xhtml">【につき】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x72764">【について】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x72766"><span class="number">1. </span>Nについて</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>農村</rb><rt>のう そん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>生活</rb><rt>せい かつ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>様式</rb><rt>ようしき</rt></ruby>について<ruby><rb>調</rb><rt>しら</rt></ruby>べている。</span>／<span class="translation">I am investigating the styles of living in farming villages.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>その<ruby><rb>点</rb><rt>てん</rt></ruby>については<ruby><rb>全面的</rb><rt>ぜん めん てき</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>賛成</rb><rt>さん せい</rt></ruby>はできない。</span>／<span class="translation">I cannot entirely agree with that point. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>自分自身</rb><rt>じ ぶん じ しん</rt></ruby>について<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なに</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>語</rb><rt>かた</rt></ruby>ろうとしない。</span>／<span class="translation">She doesn’t try to talk about herself at all.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>事故</rb><rt>じ こ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>原因</rb><rt>げん いん</rt></ruby>について<ruby><rb>究明</rb><rt>きゅう めい</rt></ruby>する。</span>／<span class="translation">I will investigate the cause of the accident.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>経営</rb><rt>けい えい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>方針</rb><rt>ほう しん</rt></ruby>についての<ruby><rb>説明</rb><rt>せつ めい</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>受</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>けた。</span>／<span class="translation">I heard the explanation regarding the management policy.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>将来</rb><rt>しょう らい</rt></ruby>についての<ruby><rb>夢</rb><rt>ゆめ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>語</rb><rt>かた</rt></ruby>った。</span>／<span class="translation">I talked about my dreams for the future.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（7）</span>ことの<ruby><rb>善悪</rb><rt>ぜん あく</rt></ruby>についての<ruby><rb>判断</rb><rt>はん だん</rt></ruby>ができなくなっている。</span>／<span class="translation">I cannot judge whether things are right and wrong now.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses the meaning of “regarding something.” When modifying a noun, becomes NについてのN, as shown in (5)-(7). In polite speech, つきまして is used in stead of について.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>その件につきましては後でお返事さしあげます。／With regard to that matter, I will give you a reply later.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x72830"><span class="number">2. </span>N+<ruby><rb>数</rb><rt>すう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>量</rb><rt>りょう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>詞</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>+について</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>車</rb><rt>くるま</rt></ruby>1<ruby><rb>台</rb><rt>だい</rt></ruby>について5<ruby><rb>千円</rb><rt>せん えん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>使用料</rb><rt>し よう りょう</rt></ruby>をちょうだいします。</span>／<span class="translation">To rent a car, the fee is 5,000 yen. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>乗客</rb><rt>じょう きゃく</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>1人</rb><rt>ひとり</rt></ruby>について3つまでの<ruby><rb>手荷物</rb><rt>て に もつ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>持</rb><rt>も</rt></ruby>ち<ruby><rb>込</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>むことができます。</span>／<span class="translation">Each passenger is allowed to take three pieces of carry-on luggage. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>作業員</rb><rt>さ ぎょう いん</rt></ruby>5<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>にん</rt></ruby>について1<ruby><rb>部屋</rb><rt>へ や</rt></ruby>しか<ruby><rb>割</rb><rt>わ</rt></ruby>り<ruby><rb>当</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>てられなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">Only one room was allocated for five workers.</span></div><div class="explanation">With a numbered unit expressed in quantity or size, expresses the meaning of “according to some unit.” Can be rephrased as ...にたいして.</div></body></html>