<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ないまでも</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0663.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ないともかぎらない】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0665.xhtml">【ないものか】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x61544">【ないまでも】</h1><h4 class="info">［V-ないまでも］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>毎日</rb><rt>まい にち</rt></ruby>とは<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>わないまでも、<ruby><rb>週</rb><rt>しゅう</rt></ruby>に2、3<ruby><rb>度</rb><rt>ど</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>掃除</rb><rt>そう じ</rt></ruby>をしようと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>う。</span>／<span class="translation">I’m not saying every day, but I’d like to do the cleaning at least two or three times a week.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>絶対</rb><rt>ぜっ たい</rt></ruby>とは<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>えないまでも、<ruby><rb>成功</rb><rt>せい こう</rt></ruby>する<ruby><rb>確率</rb><rt>かく りつ</rt></ruby>はかなり<ruby><rb>高</rb><rt>たか</rt></ruby>いと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>います。</span>／<span class="translation">Even though I cannot say it is definite, I think there is a fairly high probability that it will succeed.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>予習</rb><rt>よ しゅう</rt></ruby>はしないまでも、せめて<ruby><rb>授業</rb><rt>じゅ ぎょう</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>て<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>なさい。</span>／<span class="translation">Even if you haven’t prepared for it, you should at least come to class.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>授業</rb><rt>じゅ ぎょう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>休</rb><rt>やす</rt></ruby>むのなら<ruby><rb>直接</rb><rt>ちょく せつ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>教師</rb><rt>きょう し</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>連絡</rb><rt>れん らく</rt></ruby>しないまでも<ruby><rb>友達</rb><rt>とも だち</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>伝言</rb><rt>でん ごん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>頼</rb><rt>たの</rt></ruby>むか<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なに</rt></ruby>かすべきだと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>う。</span>／<span class="translation">If you’re going to be absent from class, even if you can’t contact the teacher directly, you should at least ask a friend to give her a message or something.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used with the negative form of a verb, ないまでも means “such a great extent is not necessarily expected, but at least this lesser extent is expected.” The first clause presents a situation or state of affairs of greater extent in terms of quantity or importance, followed by one of lesser extent in the second clause. As shown in (1) and (2) above, this expression is often used in the forms ...とは言わない／言えないまでも, in which case it means “one won’t/can’t ask that much, but at least this much is expected.” Expressions of obligation, such as すべきだ and ...た方がよい, or expressions of intention, command, or desire are used at the end of the sentence. V-ぬまでも conveys the same meaning but sounds more literary and formal.</div></body></html>