<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>どちらかというと</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0597.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【とちゅう】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0599.xhtml">【どちらかといえば】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x57030">【どちらかというと】</h1><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>はどちらかというと、<ruby><rb>人前</rb><rt>ひと まえ</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>発言</rb><rt>はつ げん</rt></ruby>するのが<ruby><rb>苦手</rb><rt>にが て</rt></ruby>である。</span>／<span class="translation">Given the choice, I’d rather not speak up in front of other people. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>この<ruby><rb>店</rb><rt>みせ</rt></ruby>はどちらかというと<ruby><rb>若者</rb><rt>わか もの</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>向</rb><rt>む</rt></ruby>けで、<ruby><rb>年配</rb><rt>ねん ぱい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>客</rb><rt>きゃく</rt></ruby>はあまり<ruby><rb>見当</rb><rt>み あ</rt></ruby>たらない。</span>／<span class="translation">This store is more for young people, so you won't see many elderly shoppers. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>あの<ruby><rb>教授</rb><rt>きょう じゅ</rt></ruby>はどちらかといえば<ruby><rb>学者</rb><rt>がく しゃ</rt></ruby>というよりビジネスマンタイプである。</span>／<span class="translation">That professor is more the businessman type than a scholar. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>大阪</rb><rt>おお さか</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>悪</rb><rt>わる</rt></ruby>くないが、どちらかというと<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>京都</rb><rt>きょう と</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>ほう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>好</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>きだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Osaka isn’t bad, but on the whole I prefer Kyoto. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>最近</rb><rt>さい きん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>大学生</rb><rt>だい がく せい</rt></ruby>は、どちらかといえば<ruby><rb>男子</rb><rt>だん し</rt></ruby>より<ruby><rb>女子</rb><rt>じょ し</rt></ruby>のほうがよく<ruby><rb>勉強</rb><rt>べん きょう</rt></ruby>して<ruby><rb>成績</rb><rt>せい せき</rt></ruby>もよい<ruby><rb>傾向</rb><rt>けい こう</rt></ruby>がある。</span>／<span class="translation">The recent trend for college students is that, generally speaking, the women study harder and get better grades than the men. </span></div><div class="explanation">Means “on the whole” or “in general.” Used when making an evaluation of the character or special features of people or things. Means that, by and large, a certain characteristic or tendency can be acknowledged. Essentially synonymous with どちらかといえば. </div></body></html>