<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>といえど</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0530.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【というより】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0532.xhtml">【といえなくもない】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x50050">【といえど】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x50052"><span class="number">1. </span>...といえど</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>この<ruby><rb>寺院</rb><rt>じ いん</rt></ruby>では、<ruby><rb>一国</rb><rt>いっ こく</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>王</rb><rt>おう</rt></ruby>といえど、<ruby><rb>靴</rb><rt>くつ</rt></ruby>をはいたまま<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>はい</rt></ruby>ることは<ruby><rb>許</rb><rt>ゆる</rt></ruby>されない。</span>／<span class="translation">At this temple, even if you’re the king of a country, you’re still not allowed to enter wearing shoes.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>暦</rb><rt>こよみ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>うえ</rt></ruby>では<ruby><rb>春</rb><rt>はる</rt></ruby>といえど、この<ruby><rb>土地</rb><rt>と ち</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>人々</rb><rt>ひと びと</rt></ruby>はいまだ<ruby><rb>真冬</rb><rt>ま ふゆ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>寒</rb><rt>さむ</rt></ruby>さにふるえている。</span>／<span class="translation">While the calendar may say it is spring, the inhabitants of this region are still shivering in midwinter cold.</span></div><div class="explanation">Same as といえども.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x50077"><span class="number">2. </span>...といえども</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>冬山</rb><rt>ふゆ やま</rt></ruby>はベテランの<ruby><rb>登山家</rb><rt>と ざん か</rt></ruby>といえども<ruby><rb>遭難</rb><rt>そう なん</rt></ruby>する<ruby><rb>危険</rb><rt>き けん</rt></ruby>がある。</span>／<span class="translation">Even for veteran mountaineers, winter climbing still carries the danger of mishaps.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>スポーツマンの<ruby><rb>家田</rb><rt>いえ だ</rt></ruby>さんといえども<ruby><rb>風邪</rb><rt>か ぜ</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>勝</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>てなかったらしい。</span>／<span class="translation">Even a sportsman like Ieda-san apparently could not defeat a common cold.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>その<ruby><rb>機密</rb><rt>き みつ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>厳重</rb><rt>げん じゅう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>管理</rb><rt>かん り</rt></ruby>されており、たとえ、<ruby><rb>部長</rb><rt>ぶ ちょう</rt></ruby>といえども<ruby><rb>近</rb><rt>ちか</rt></ruby>づくことは<ruby><rb>禁</rb><rt>きん</rt></ruby>じられている。</span>／<span class="translation">That secret information is strictly guarded, and even if you’re a department head, you’re not allowed to get close to it.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>弘法大師</rb><rt>こう ぼう だい し</rt></ruby>といえども<ruby><rb>字</rb><rt>じ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>間違</rb><rt>ま ちが</rt></ruby>えることがあるのだから、<ruby><rb>少々</rb><rt>しょう しょう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>失敗</rb><rt>しっ ぱい</rt></ruby>にくよくよすることはない。</span>／<span class="translation">Even the great Kobo Daishi made mistakes with his Chinese characters, so there’s no reason to fret over just a little flub.</span></div><div class="explanation">This is an expression of concession that highlights someone’s or something’s qualifications or abilities and then presents a situation counter to the expectation that “with those qualifications/abilities, surely X should be possible.” Used in formal spoken language, as well as in novels and other types of written language. Can be substituted with でも.</div></body></html>