<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ただし</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0379.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ただ】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0381.xhtml">【ただでさえ】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x31033">【ただし】</h1><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>テニスコートの<ruby><rb>使用料</rb><rt>し よう りょう</rt></ruby>は1<ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>千円</rb><rt>せん えん</rt></ruby>。ただし、<ruby><rb>午前中</rb><rt>ご ぜん ちゅう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>半額</rb><rt>はん がく</rt></ruby>となります。</span>／<span class="translation">The fee to use the tennis court is 1,000 yen an hour. However, in the morning it’s half-price.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>ハイキングの<ruby><rb>参加費</rb><rt>さん か ひ</rt></ruby>はバス<ruby><rb>代</rb><rt>だい</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>含</rb><rt>ふく</rt></ruby>めて<ruby><rb>一人</rb><rt>ひとり</rt></ruby>2<ruby><rb>千円</rb><rt>せん えん</rt></ruby>です。ただし、<ruby><rb>昼食</rb><rt>ちゅう しょく</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>各自</rb><rt>かく じ</rt></ruby>ご<ruby><rb>用意</rb><rt>よう い</rt></ruby>ください。</span>／<span class="translation">The fee for taking part in the hike, including the cost of the bus, is 2,000 yen per person. However, please bring your own lunch.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>病人</rb><rt>びょう にん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>少</rb><rt>すこ</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>落</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>ち<ruby><rb>着</rb><rt>つ</rt></ruby>いてきましたから<ruby><rb>面会</rb><rt>めん かい</rt></ruby>はかまいません。ただし、<ruby><rb>興奮</rb><rt>こう ふん</rt></ruby>するといけませんから、あまり<ruby><rb>長</rb><rt>なが</rt></ruby>く<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はな</rt></ruby>さないようにしてください。</span>／<span class="translation">The patient is beginning to stabilize, so you may visit him, but he shouldn't get over-excited, so please don’t talk too long.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>日曜日</rb><rt>にち よう び</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>閉店</rb><rt>へい てん</rt></ruby>します。ただし、<ruby><rb>祭日</rb><rt>さい じつ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>日曜日</rb><rt>にち よう び</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>重</rb><rt>かさ</rt></ruby>なる<ruby><rb>場合</rb><rt>ば あい</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>開店</rb><rt>かい てん</rt></ruby>します。</span>／<span class="translation">We’re closed on Sundays. However, when a public holiday falls on a Sunday, then we’re open.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>診察</rb><rt>しんさつ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>夜</rb><rt>よる</rt></ruby>7<ruby><rb>時</rb><rt>じ</rt></ruby>まで。ただし、<ruby><rb>急患</rb><rt>きゅう かん</rt></ruby>はこの<ruby><rb>限</rb><rt>かぎ</rt></ruby>りではない。</span>／<span class="translation">Consultation hours are until 7:00 p.m. However, this doesn’t apply to emergency cases.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to indicate details of special note or exceptions concerning something that was previously stated.</div></body></html>