<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>いったん...と</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0062.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【いったらない】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0064.xhtml">【いっぽう】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x5907">【いったん...と】</h1><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>はおしゃべりな<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>で、いったん<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はな</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>だ</rt></ruby>すと<ruby><rb>止</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>まらない。</span>／<span class="translation">She is a very talkative person; once she starts to talk, she never stops.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>いったんテレビゲームを<ruby><rb>始</rb><rt>はじ</rt></ruby>めると2<ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby>ぐらいはすぐに<ruby><rb>経</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>ってしまう。</span>／<span class="translation">Once I start to play a video game, two hours or so pass very quickly. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>いったんこの<ruby><rb>段階</rb><rt>だん かい</rt></ruby>まで<ruby><rb>快復</rb><rt>かい ふく</rt></ruby>すれば、<ruby><rb>後</rb><rt>あと</rt></ruby>はもう<ruby><rb>大丈夫</rb><rt>だい じょう ぶ</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">Once you recover to this level, then you’ll be all right.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>このお<ruby><rb>菓子</rb><rt>か し</rt></ruby>はいったんふたを<ruby><rb>開</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>けるとすぐに<ruby><rb>湿</rb><rt>しめ</rt></ruby>ってしまうので、<ruby><rb>早</rb><rt>はや</rt></ruby>く<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べなければならない。</span>／<span class="translation">These sweets get soggy right away once the lid is opened, so we have to eat them quickly.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>いったんこんなゆとりのある<ruby><rb>生活</rb><rt>せい かつ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>慣</rb><rt>な</rt></ruby>れてしまったら、もう<ruby><rb>前</rb><rt>まえ</rt></ruby>のような<ruby><rb>忙</rb><rt>いそが</rt></ruby>しい<ruby><rb>生活</rb><rt>せい かつ</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>戻</rb><rt>もど</rt></ruby>れない。</span>／<span class="translation">Once you get used to a laid-back lifestyle like this, you can’t go back to the busy life you used to have. </span></div><div class="explanation">たら and ば may also be used instead of と. Means that once changes take place, or things begin changing, it is not possible to return to the original state.</div></body></html>