<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>お...いたす</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0079.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【える】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0081.xhtml">【お...いただく】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x7555">【お...いたす】</h1><h4 class="info">［おR-いたす］</h4><h4 class="info">［ごNいたす］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>お<ruby><rb>食事</rb><rt>しょく じ</rt></ruby>をお<ruby><rb>持</rb><rt>も</rt></ruby>ちいたしましょうか。</span>／<span class="translation">Shall I bring you your meal?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>お<ruby><rb>名前</rb><rt>な まえ</rt></ruby>をお<ruby><rb>呼</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>びいたしますので、それまでここでお<ruby><rb>待</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>ちください。</span>／<span class="translation">Please wait here until I call your name.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>のちほどこちらから<ruby><rb>改</rb><rt>あらた</rt></ruby>めてご<ruby><rb>連絡</rb><rt>れん らく</rt></ruby>いたします。</span>／<span class="translation">I will contact you again later.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>それではレセプション<ruby><rb>会場</rb><rt>かい じょう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>ほう</rt></ruby>へご<ruby><rb>案内</rb><rt>あん ない</rt></ruby>いたします。</span>／<span class="translation">Allow me to take you to the reception hall.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>今回</rb><rt>こん かい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>件</rb><rt>けん</rt></ruby>につきましては、<ruby><rb>皆様</rb><rt>みな さま</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>納得</rb><rt>なっ とく</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>くまでご<ruby><rb>説明</rb><rt>せつ めい</rt></ruby>いたしたいと<ruby><rb>存</rb><rt>ぞん</rt></ruby>じます。</span>／<span class="translation">I would like to explain this matter to everyone’s satisfaction.</span></div><div class="explanation">お...いたす is used with a verb stem or a noun of Chinese origin that indicates an act. When it is used with a noun of Chinese origin, it often takes the form ごNいたす, as in (3), (4), and (5). This is a politer, more humble way to sayお...する. The <i>m</i><i>asu</i>-form<i> </i>is usually used. </div><h4 class="reference">→<a href="part0084.xhtml#idtitlex1x7713">【お...する】</a></h4></body></html>