<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>きらいがある</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0181.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ぎみ】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0183.xhtml">【きり】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x14429">【きらいがある】</h1><h4 class="info">［Nのきらいがある］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-るきらいがある］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>はいい<ruby><rb>男</rb><rt>おとこ</rt></ruby>だが、なんでもおおげさに<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>うきらいがある。</span>／<span class="translation">He is a good man, but he tends to exaggerate everything.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>最近</rb><rt>さい きん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>学生</rb><rt>がく せい</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>自分</rb><rt>じ ぶん</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>調</rb><rt>しら</rt></ruby>べず、すぐ<ruby><rb>教師</rb><rt>きょう し</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>頼</rb><rt>たよ</rt></ruby>るきらいがある。</span>／<span class="translation">Students today tend not to examine things for themselves but to depend on teachers too readily.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>あの<ruby><rb>先生</rb><rt>せん せい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>講義</rb><rt>こう ぎ</rt></ruby>はおもしろいのだが、いつの<ruby><rb>間</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>にか<ruby><rb>自慢話</rb><rt>じ まん ばなし</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>変</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>わってしまうきらいがある。</span>／<span class="translation">That teacher’s lecture is interesting, but it tends to turn to boasting.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>あの<ruby><rb>政治家</rb><rt>せい じ か</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>有能</rb><rt>ゆう のう</rt></ruby>だが、やや<ruby><rb>独断専行</rb><rt>どく だん せん こう</rt></ruby>のきらいがある。</span>／<span class="translation">That politician is competent, but he tends to be arbitrary.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses that something has a certain tendency. Used for negative things. Has the feel of written language.</div></body></html>