<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>にくい</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0769.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【にきまっている】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0771.xhtml">【にくらべて】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x70893">【にくい】</h1><h4 class="info">［R-にくい］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>あの<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はなし</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>発音</rb><rt>はつ おん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>不明瞭</rb><rt>ふ めい りょう</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>分</rb><rt>わ</rt></ruby>かりにくい。</span>／<span class="translation">It’s hard to understand what he says because his pronunciation isn’t clear.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>砂利道</rb><rt>じゃ り みち</rt></ruby>はハイヒールでは<ruby><rb>歩</rb><rt>ある</rt></ruby>きにくい。</span>／<span class="translation">It’s hard to walk on a gravel path wearing high heels.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>人前</rb><rt>ひと まえ</rt></ruby>ではちょっと<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はな</rt></ruby>しにくい<ruby><rb>内容</rb><rt>ない よう</rt></ruby>なのです。</span>／<span class="translation">This matter is a little bit difficult to talk about in public.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>あんなえらい<ruby><rb>先生</rb><rt>せん せい</rt></ruby>のところにはなかなか<ruby><rb>相談</rb><rt>そう だん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>きにくい。</span>／<span class="translation">It’s fairly difficult to go consult with such a high-ranking professor. </span></div><div class="explanation">Conjugates in the same way as <i>i-</i>adjectives. With the stem of a verb, expresses the meaning that something is hard to do or not easily done. Used when something is physically hard to achieve, as shown in (1) and (2), or when it is psychologically hard to accomplish, as shown in (3) and (4). Except for examples such as 分かりにくい(difficult to understand), にくい is preceded by a verb of volitional action such as 歩く(walk) or 話す(talk). </div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>あの人は喜びにくい人です。／That person is difficult to please. </div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>あの人を喜ばせるのはむずかしい。／It is difficult to please that person. </div><div class="explanation">There is also an expression which shows the opposite meaning: R-やすい.</div></body></html>