<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>よう2</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part1023.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【よう<sub class="variation">1</sub>】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part1025.xhtml">【ようするに】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x101286">【よう<sub class="variation">2</sub>】</h1><h4 class="info">［V-よう］</h4><div class="explanation">One of the Japanese verb conjugation forms. Expresses the speaker’s will or conjecture. -よう attaches to the continuative form of Group 2 verbs, for example: 見よう((will) see) , 食べよう((will) eat). 来る(come) and する(do) become こよう((will) come) and しよう((will) do). In the case of Group 1 verbs, -う is added to the <i>o</i>-row, for example: 行こう((will) go), 読もう((will) read), 話そう((will) speak). In polite Japanese, the form is R-ましょう, as in 食べましょう, 行きましょう.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x101307"><span class="number">1. </span>V-よう〈intention〉</h2><div class="explanation">Using verbs which demonstrate intentional acts, expresses the intent behind the speaker’s action. The rules of usage differ depending on the situation in which it is used, for example in a report, an invitation, or an indirect demand.</div><div class="explanation">In polite Japanese, expressions such as ...しましょう／いたしましょう are used.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x101333"><span class="number">a. </span>V-よう〈volition〉</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>夏休</rb><rt>なつ やす</rt></ruby>みには<ruby><rb>海</rb><rt>うみ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>こう。</span>／<span class="translation">Let’s go to the sea during summer vacation.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>来年</rb><rt>らい ねん</rt></ruby>こそはよい<ruby><rb>成績</rb><rt>せい せき</rt></ruby>がとれるように<ruby><rb>頑張</rb><rt>がん ば</rt></ruby>ろう。</span>／<span class="translation">Let’s do our best to get good grades next year for sure.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>にもすることないから、テレビでも<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>ようっと。</span>／<span class="translation">As there is nothing to do, I’ll watch television or something. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>はっきり<ruby><rb>申</rb><rt>もう</rt></ruby>しましょう。あなたにはこの<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>無理</rb><rt>む り</rt></ruby>です。</span>／<span class="translation">Let me be frank with you. For you, this job is impossible.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>今夜</rb><rt>こん や</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>一杯</rb><rt>いっ ぱい</rt></ruby>いかがですか。</span>／<span class="translation">How about a drink this evening?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>そうですねえ。<ruby><rb>今日</rb><rt>きょう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>遠慮</rb><rt>えん りょ</rt></ruby>しておきましょう。</span>／<span class="translation">Hmm. I’m going to take it easy today.</span></div><div class="explanation">Using verbs which demonstrate intentional acts expresses the speaker’s intention and assumption that the action will take place. Example (3) is an expression typical of someone speaking to themselves. Can also be pronounced in the shorter form V-よっと.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x101391"><span class="number">b. </span>V-よう〈offer〉</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>足</rb><rt>あし</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>痛</rb><rt>いた</rt></ruby>いのか。おぶってやろう。</span>／<span class="translation">Do your legs hurt? I’ll carry you.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>忙</rb><rt>いそが</rt></ruby>しいのなら、<ruby><rb>手伝</rb><rt>て つだ</rt></ruby>ってあげよう。</span>／<span class="translation">If you’re busy, I’ll help you.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>その<ruby><rb>荷物</rb><rt>に もつ</rt></ruby>、お<ruby><rb>持</rb><rt>も</rt></ruby>ちしましょう。</span>／<span class="translation">Let me carry that luggage (for you).</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>切符</rb><rt>きっ ぷ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>手配</rb><rt>て はい</rt></ruby>いたしましょう。</span>／<span class="translation">I’ll arrange the tickets.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>駅</rb><rt>えき</rt></ruby>までお<ruby><rb>送</rb><rt>おく</rt></ruby>りしましょう。</span>／<span class="translation">I’ll take you to the station.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used by the speaker to offer something they can do for another person. It is an action the speaker intends to do for the benefit of another. In humble speech, as in examples (3)-(5), it becomes ...いたしましょう or お...しましょう／いたしましょう.  </div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x101437"><span class="number">c. </span>V-よう〈invitation〉</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>君</rb><rt>きみ</rt></ruby>もいっしょに<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>こうよ。</span>／<span class="translation">Why don’t you come with us?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>一度</rb><rt>いち ど</rt></ruby>ゆっくり<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はな</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>合</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>おう。</span>／<span class="translation">Let’s discuss it at our leisure some time.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>今夜</rb><rt>こん や</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>飲</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>み<ruby><rb>明</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>かそうよ。</span>／<span class="translation">Let’s drink the night away tonight.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>お<ruby><rb>待</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>たせしました。では<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>かけましょう。</span>／<span class="translation">Thank you for waiting. Right, let’s be going.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to invite the listener to act together with the speaker. In contrast to the meaning〈offer〉in b, where only the speaker is to undertake the action,〈invitation〉is used to invite the listener also to act together with the speaker. </div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x101477"><span class="number">d. </span>V-よう〈appeal〉</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>横断</rb><rt>おう だん</rt></ruby>する<ruby><rb>時</rb><rt>とき</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>左右</rb><rt>さ ゆう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>車</rb><rt>くるま</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>注意</rb><rt>ちゅう い</rt></ruby>しよう。</span>／<span class="translation">Watch out for cars from the left and right when crossing.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>飲酒</rb><rt>いんしゅ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>運転</rb><rt>うん てん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>絶対</rb><rt>ぜっ たい</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>避</rb><rt>さ</rt></ruby>けよう。</span>／<span class="translation">Let us make sure we will never drink and drive.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>食事</rb><rt>しょく じ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>前</rb><rt>まえ</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>手</rb><rt>て</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>洗</rb><rt>あら</rt></ruby>いましょう。</span>／<span class="translation">Please wash your hands before eating.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>動物</rb><rt>どう ぶつ</rt></ruby>にいたずらしないようにしましょう。</span>／<span class="translation">Please don’t disturb the animals.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to appeal to a mass of people either to carry out or to refrain from carrying out a certain action. An expression often used on posters or bunting which is to be seen by many people and appeals to people to follow its instructions/advice. </div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x101514"><span class="number">e. </span>もらおう／V-てもらおう</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>ビールをもう<ruby><rb>一本</rb><rt>いっ ぽん</rt></ruby>もらおう。</span>／<span class="translation">Get me another beer.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>あんたには<ruby><rb>死</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>んでもらおう。</span>／<span class="translation">You must die!</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>ちょっと<ruby><rb>警察署</rb><rt>けい さつ しょ</rt></ruby>まで<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>ていただきましょう。</span>／<span class="translation">We’d like you to come to the police station.</span></div><div class="explanation">In the form (V-て)もらおう／いただこう, used to make an indirect demand of the listener. Similar to expressions used to make requests such as ビールをください(please give (me) beer), 死んでくれ(die!), and 来てください(please come) but (V-て)もらおう has the stronger nuance that the speaker is making a unilateral demand. From a social perspective, it is difficult to use this if one is not a person of higher social rank or in a position of higher authority in the workplace.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x101548"><span class="number">2. </span>V-よう〈supposition, conjecture〉</h2><div class="explanation">Like だろう, this expresses the speaker’s conjecture but is somewhat more old-fashioned. Has the tone of written language. <i>i</i>-adjectives also have the same rules of usage as this (A-かろう) , as inよかろう／寒かろう.  </div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x101564"><span class="number">a. </span>V-よう</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>場合</rb><rt>ば あい</rt></ruby>によっては<ruby><rb>延期</rb><rt>えん き</rt></ruby>されることもあろう。</span>／<span class="translation">Depending on the situation, it may be postponed.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>この<ruby><rb>点</rb><rt>てん</rt></ruby>については<ruby><rb>次</rb><rt>つぎ</rt></ruby>のようなことが<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>えよう。</span>／<span class="translation">Regarding this point, perhaps we can say the following.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>午後</rb><rt>ご ご</rt></ruby>からは<ruby><rb>全国的</rb><rt>ぜん こく てき</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>晴</rb><rt>は</rt></ruby>れましょう。</span>／<span class="translation">It is likely to be sunny across the country from the afternoon.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>山沿</rb><rt>やま ぞ</rt></ruby>いでは<ruby><rb>雪</rb><rt>ゆき</rt></ruby>になりましょう。</span>／<span class="translation">There is likely to be snow in the mountains.</span></div><div class="explanation">This shows the speaker’s conjecture. It is often used with phrases which express possibility but not will, such as ある and なる or 言える, できる, 考えられる and あり得る. The negative form is V-まい.</div><div class="explanation">An old-fashioned, written expression. In speech, だろう is used. V-ましょうis the polite form of V-ようand was often used on weather forecasts in the past but nowadays でしょう is used.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x101611"><span class="number">b. </span>V-ようか</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>結論</rb><rt>けつ ろん</rt></ruby>としては、<ruby><rb>次</rb><rt>つぎ</rt></ruby>のようなことが<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>えようか。</span>／<span class="translation">I wonder if we might conclude the following.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>こんなひどいことをする<ruby><rb>人間</rb><rt>にん げん</rt></ruby>がこの<ruby><rb>世</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>にあろうか。</span>／<span class="translation">Are there really people in this world who would do such a horrible thing?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>こんなに<ruby><rb>貧</rb><rt>まず</rt></ruby>しい<ruby><rb>人達</rb><rt>ひと たち</rt></ruby>をどうして<ruby><rb>放</rb><rt>ほう</rt></ruby>っておけようか。</span>／<span class="translation">How can we ignore such needy people?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>そんな<ruby><rb>馬鹿</rb><rt>ば か</rt></ruby>げたことがありえましょうか。</span>／<span class="translation">Is such stupidity possible?</span></div><div class="explanation">A way of saying だろうか in writing. Shows doubt or rhetorical negation. The irony in examples (2)-(4) can be interpreted as meaning “I wonder/no, that’s not the case.” Many use it in the direct style.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x101651"><span class="number">3. </span>V-ようか〈intention〉</h2><div class="explanation">Makes a question of the volitional form of a verb and is used in cases where the speaker is expressing some doubt as to their own intentions or ideas and asks for the listener’s intent. The basic rules of usage are the same as V-よう but, through the addition of the か, the meaning changes to expressing uncertainty or asking a question.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x101667"><span class="number">a. </span>V-ようか〈volition〉</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>どうしようか。</span>／<span class="translation">What should we do?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>昼</rb><rt>ひる</rt></ruby>ご<ruby><rb>飯</rb><rt>はん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なに</rt></ruby>にしようかな。</span>／<span class="translation">What should we have for lunch?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>こうか、それともやめておこうか。</span>／<span class="translation">Should I go or should I give it a miss?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>考</rb><rt>かんが</rt></ruby>えていること、<ruby><rb>白状</rb><rt>はく じょう</rt></ruby>しちゃおうか。</span>／<span class="translation">Should I confess what I’m thinking?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>こんな<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>やめてしまおうかしら。</span>／<span class="translation">Perhaps I ought to quit this kind of work?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span>これからどうして<ruby><rb>暮</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>らしていこうか。</span>／<span class="translation">How am I going to live now?</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses that the speaker is in two minds over whether to conduct the act or not and has not decided. Apart from か, かな and かしら can also be attached. As かな and かしら are more in the style of someone speaking to themselves, it is difficult to use them with polite Japanese and ましょうかな／ましょうかしら and so on are not usually used.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x101719"><span class="number">b. </span>V-ようか〈offer〉</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>君</rb><rt>きみ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>代</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>わりに<ruby><rb>僕</rb><rt>ぼく</rt></ruby>がやろうか。</span>／<span class="translation">Shall I do it instead of you?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>荷物</rb><rt>に もつ</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>僕</rb><rt>ぼく</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>持</rb><rt>も</rt></ruby>とうか。</span>／<span class="translation">Shall I carry your luggage?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なに</rt></ruby>かお<ruby><rb>手伝</rb><rt>て つだ</rt></ruby>いしましょうか。</span>／<span class="translation">Can I help you with something?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>いいこと<ruby><rb>教</rb><rt>おし</rt></ruby>えてあげましょうか。</span>／<span class="translation">Shall I tell you something good?</span></div><div class="explanation">Used with both rising and falling intonation but, when used with a rising intonation, the sense that a question is being asked is stronger.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x101759"><span class="number">c. </span>V-ようか〈invitation〉</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>結婚</rb><rt>けっ こん</rt></ruby>しようか。</span>／<span class="translation">Shall we get married?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>何時</rb><rt>なん じ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>待</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>ち<ruby><rb>合</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>わせしようか。</span>／<span class="translation">What time shall we meet?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>どこかで<ruby><rb>食事</rb><rt>しょく じ</rt></ruby>しましょうか。</span>／<span class="translation">Shall we get a meal somewhere?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>いっしょに<ruby><rb>海外旅行</rb><rt>かい がい りょ こう</rt></ruby>しましょうか。</span>／<span class="translation">Shall we take a trip abroad together?</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to invite the listener to undertake an action together with the speaker. Often used with falling intonation but, when rising intonation is used, the sense that a question is being asked is stronger.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x101796"><span class="number">d. </span>もらおうか／V-てもらおうか</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>お<ruby><rb>茶</rb><rt>ちゃ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>一杯</rb><rt>いっ ぱい</rt></ruby>もらおうか。</span>／<span class="translation">Could I have a cup of tea?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>これ、コピーしてもらおうか。</span>／<span class="translation">Copy this for me.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>君</rb><rt>きみ</rt></ruby>には、しばらく<ruby><rb>席</rb><rt>せき</rt></ruby>をはずしていだだきましょうか。</span>／<span class="translation">Would you leave us for a moment?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><span class="number">A:</span>もうすぐ、<ruby><rb>帰</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>ると<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>います。</span>／<span class="translation">I think she’ll return soon.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>じゃ、ここで<ruby><rb>待</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>たせてもらいましょうか。</span>／<span class="translation">In that case, I will wait here.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to indirectly make a demand of the listener. The attachment of the か adds the sense that the speaker has only just arrived at that thought or that there is a feeling of hesitation and so this makes the request slightly softer than without it. From a social perspective, it is usually used by people of superior rank speaking to their subordinates. </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x101845"><span class="number">4. </span>V-ようが</h2><div class="explanation">A written version of V-ても and means “whatever kind of action is taken/whatever kind of situation occurs.” Phrases such as 自由だ／勝手だ(be free (to do)/be up to (someone)), which express that an event, a decision, or a demand will come to take place regardless of that action/situation come afterwards. There are many instances in which it can be rephrased as V-ようと but there are also cases in which it cannot be rephrased.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x101858"><span class="number">a. </span>V-ようが</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>どこで<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なに</rt></ruby>をしようが<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>勝手</rb><rt>かっ て</rt></ruby>でしょう。</span>／<span class="translation">What I do and where is up to me.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>になんと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>われようが、<ruby><rb>自分</rb><rt>じ ぶん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>決</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>めたことは<ruby><rb>実行</rb><rt>じっ こう</rt></ruby>する。</span>／<span class="translation">Whatever people say to you, do what you have decided to do.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>がどうなろうが、<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>ったことではない。</span>／<span class="translation">Whatever happens to him is nothing to do with me.</span></div><div class="explanation">Shows that the latter thing occurs without being restricted by the former. The latter part uses expressions such as 自由だ(be free(to do))／勝手だ(be up to (the person)) which demonstrate intention or determination.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x101889"><span class="number">b. </span>V-ようがV-ようが</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>出掛</rb><rt>で か</rt></ruby>けようが<ruby><rb>家</rb><rt>いえ</rt></ruby>にいようが、あなたの<ruby><rb>自由</rb><rt>じ ゆう</rt></ruby>です。</span>／<span class="translation">Go out, stay in, it’s up to you.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>雨</rb><rt>あめ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>降</rb><rt>ふ</rt></ruby>ろうがやりが<ruby><rb>降</rb><rt>ふ</rt></ruby>ろうが、<ruby><rb>試合</rb><rt>し あい</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>決行</rb><rt>けっ こう</rt></ruby>します。</span>／<span class="translation">Whether drops or spears fall from the sky, the match shall take place.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>みんなに<ruby><rb>笑</rb><rt>わら</rt></ruby>われようがバカにされようが、<ruby><rb>気</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>にしない。</span>／<span class="translation">I don’t care whether I’m laughed at or made fun of by everyone.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to list things which are opposite or which are similar, this means “whatever happens/whatever (one) does.” The rules of usage are the same as for Usage 4a above. </div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x101920"><span class="number">c. </span>V-ようがV-まいが</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>あなたが<ruby><rb>出席</rb><rt>しゅっ せき</rt></ruby>しようがしまいが、<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>出席</rb><rt>しゅっ せき</rt></ruby>します。</span>／<span class="translation">Whether you attend or not, I will.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>勉強</rb><rt>べん きょう</rt></ruby>をやろうがやるまいが<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>勝手</rb><rt>かっ て</rt></ruby>でしょう。</span>／<span class="translation">It’s up to me whether I study or not.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>パーティは<ruby><rb>参加</rb><rt>さん か</rt></ruby>しようがしまいが、<ruby><rb>皆</rb><rt>みな</rt></ruby>さんの<ruby><rb>自由</rb><rt>じ ゆう</rt></ruby>です。</span>／<span class="translation">Whether they attend the party or not is up to everyone individually.</span></div><div class="explanation">Using both the positive and the negative volitional form of the same verb, this means “whichever action (one) takes.” A formal way of saying ...してもしなくても. </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x101951"><span class="number">5. </span>V-ようじゃないか</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>一緒</rb><rt>いっ しょ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>飲</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>もうじゃないか。</span>／<span class="translation">We should go drinking together.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>みんなでがんばろうじゃないか。</span>／<span class="translation">Let’s do our best together.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>よし、そんなにおれと<ruby><rb>喧嘩</rb><rt>けん か</rt></ruby>したいのなら、<ruby><rb>受</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>けて<ruby><rb>立</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>とうじゃないか。</span>／<span class="translation">Right, if you want to fight with me so much, I’ll take you on.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>今夜</rb><rt>こん や</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>語</rb><rt>かた</rt></ruby>り<ruby><rb>明</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>かそうではありませんか。</span>／<span class="translation">Let’s talk all night tonight.</span></div><div class="explanation">Attached to verbs which express intention, this is a strong declaration of one’s intentions and is used to invite the listener to act together with the speaker. Mainly used by men and has a stronger sense of influence over the other person than V-ようか. Women usually use ...ましょう. The polite form is ...ようではありませんか／ないですか. </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x101988"><span class="number">6. </span>V-ようと</h2><div class="explanation">A written version of V-ても and means “whatever kind of action is taken/whatever kind of situation occurs.” Phrases such as 自由だ／勝手だ(be free (to do)/be up to (someone)), which express that a thing will come to take place regardless of that action/situation come afterwards. There are many instances in which it can be rephrased as V-ようが but there are also cases in which it cannot be rephrased as ても.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x102001"><span class="number">a. </span>V-ようと</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>なにをしようと<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>自由</rb><rt>じ ゆう</rt></ruby>でしょう。</span>／<span class="translation">What I do is up to me.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>どこへ<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>こうとあなたの<ruby><rb>勝手</rb><rt>かっ て</rt></ruby>です。</span>／<span class="translation">Where you go is up to you.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>どんなに<ruby><rb>馬鹿</rb><rt>ば か</rt></ruby>にされようと、<ruby><rb>腹</rb><rt>はら</rt></ruby>をたてるでもなく<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>はひたすら<ruby><rb>働</rb><rt>はたら</rt></ruby>いている。</span>／<span class="translation">However much people make fun of him, he just carries on working without getting angry.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses that the latter thing occurs without being restricted by the former. Phrases such as 勝手だ(up to (someone))／自由だ(free (to do)／関係ない(nothing to do with) come afterwards.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x102032"><span class="number">b. </span>V-ようとV-ようと</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>努力</rb><rt>ど りょく</rt></ruby>しようと<ruby><rb>怠</rb><rt>なま</rt></ruby>けようと<ruby><rb>結果</rb><rt>けっ か</rt></ruby>がすべてだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Whether you work hard or are lazy, it’s the result that counts.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>あなたが<ruby><rb>泣</rb><rt>な</rt></ruby>こうとわめこうと、<ruby><rb>僕</rb><rt>ぼく</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>関係</rb><rt>かん けい</rt></ruby>ない。</span>／<span class="translation">Whether you cry or shout, it’s nothing to do with me.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>こうとやめようと<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>勝手</rb><rt>かっ て</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">Whether I go or not is up to me.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>遊</rb><rt>あそ</rt></ruby>ぼうと<ruby><rb>勉強</rb><rt>べん きょう</rt></ruby>しようとお<ruby><rb>好</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>きなようにしてください。</span>／<span class="translation">Whether you play or study, please do as you wish.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>煮</rb><rt>に</rt></ruby>て<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>おうと<ruby><rb>焼</rb><rt>や</rt></ruby>いて<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>おうとご<ruby><rb>自由</rb><rt>じ ゆう</rt></ruby>に。</span>／<span class="translation">Eat boiled or baked as you wish.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>駆</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>け<ruby><rb>落</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>ちしようと<ruby><rb>心中</rb><rt>しん じゅう</rt></ruby>しようと<ruby><rb>勝手</rb><rt>かっ て</rt></ruby>にしろ。</span>／<span class="translation">Elope or commit double (lovers’) suicide as you wish.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to list things which are opposite or which are similar, this means “it doesn’t matter what (you) do/it’s up to you” and that, whatever action one takes, regardless of that the latter thing will occur.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x102081"><span class="number">c. </span>V-ようとV-まいと</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>こうと<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>くまいとあなたの<ruby><rb>自由</rb><rt>じ ゆう</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">Whether you stay or go is up to you.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>たくさん<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べようと<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べまいと<ruby><rb>料金</rb><rt>りょう きん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>同</rb><rt>おな</rt></ruby>じだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Whether you eat a lot or not, the cost is the same.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>君</rb><rt>きみ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>会</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>おうと<ruby><rb>会</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>うまいと<ruby><rb>僕</rb><rt>ぼく</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>関係</rb><rt>かん けい</rt></ruby>のないことだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Whether you meet her or not is nothing to do with me.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “whether one does... or not.”</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x102112"><span class="number">d. </span>V-ようとも</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>皆</rb><rt>みな</rt></ruby>にどんなに<ruby><rb>反対</rb><rt>はん たい</rt></ruby>されようとも<ruby><rb>決</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>めたことは<ruby><rb>実行</rb><rt>じっ こう</rt></ruby>する。</span>／<span class="translation">However much people oppose me, I’ll do what I’ve decided.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>たとえどんなことが<ruby><rb>起</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>ころうとも、<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>からは<ruby><rb>一生</rb><rt>いっ しょう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>離</rb><rt>はな</rt></ruby>れない。</span>／<span class="translation">Whatever happens, I’ll never leave him.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>どんなに<ruby><rb>脅</rb><rt>おど</rt></ruby>かされようとも、<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>毅然</rb><rt>き ぜん</rt></ruby>とした<ruby><rb>態度</rb><rt>たい ど</rt></ruby>をくずさなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">However much he was threatened, they didn’t break his resolve.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>いかに<ruby><rb>富</rb><rt>とみ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>恵</rb><rt>めぐ</rt></ruby>まれようとも、<ruby><rb>精神</rb><rt>せい しん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>貧</rb><rt>まず</rt></ruby>しくては<ruby><rb>幸</rb><rt>しあわ</rt></ruby>せとは<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>えない。</span>／<span class="translation">However much wealth you are blessed with, if you have no heart it cannot be called happiness. </span></div><div class="explanation">Adding も to V-ようと, this is a written expression for V-ても. The meaning and rules of usage are the same as for instances without も but this carries a slightly more old-fashioned nuance. Often used with phrases such as (たとえ)どんなに／いかに.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x102149"><span class="number">7. </span>V-ようとおもう</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>お<ruby><rb>正月</rb><rt>しょう がつ</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>温泉</rb><rt>おん せん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>こうと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>う。</span>／<span class="translation">I think I’ll go to a hot spring at New Year’s. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>来年</rb><rt>らい ねん</rt></ruby>はもっと<ruby><rb>頑張</rb><rt>がん ば</rt></ruby>ろうと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>う。</span>／<span class="translation">I think I’ll try harder next year.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>今夜</rb><rt>こん や</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>早</rb><rt>はや</rt></ruby>く<ruby><rb>寝</rb><rt>ね</rt></ruby>ようと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>っている。</span>／<span class="translation">I’m thinking of going to bed early this evening.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>辞</rb><rt>や</rt></ruby>めようかと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>っている。</span>／<span class="translation">I’m wondering whether I should quit my job.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>外国</rb><rt>がい こく</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>住</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>もうとは<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>わない。</span>／<span class="translation">I have no intention of living abroad.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span>あなたは<ruby><rb>一生</rb><rt>いっ しょう</rt></ruby>この<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>続</rb><rt>つづ</rt></ruby>けようと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>いますか。</span>／<span class="translation">Do you think you’ll do this job for life?</span></div><div class="explanation">Taking verbs which demonstrate intention, this is used to express the speaker’s plans or intentions. In interrogative sentences it is used to ask the listener’s intentions. Also, the かと思う of example (4) demonstrates that the speaker’s indecisiveness or hesitancy. V-ようと(は)思わない means that the speaker has no such intention.</div><div class="explanation">Similar to つもりだ but differs in that つもりだ can be used to express the will of a third person.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>山田さんは留学するつもりだ。／Yamada-san intends to study abroad.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>山田さんは留学しようと思う。／Yamada-san intends to study abroad.</div><div class="explanation">Moreover, V-ると思う is used to express the speaker’s conjecture rather than will and cannot be used in cases where one wishes to express intention. In such cases V-ようと思う must be used.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>私は東京へ行くと思う。（意志の表現としては誤り）／I think I will go to Tokyo. (Incorrect as an expression of intention.)</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>私は東京へ行こうと思う。／I think I will go to Tokyo.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x102254"><span class="number">8. </span>V-ようとする</h2><h3 class="subsubtitle" id="idsubsubtitlex1x102260"><span class="number">a. </span>V-ようとする〈immediately before〉</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>時計</rb><rt>と けい</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>正午</rb><rt>しょう ご</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>らせようとしている。</span>／<span class="translation">The clock is about to strike midday.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>長</rb><rt>なが</rt></ruby>かった<ruby><rb>夏休</rb><rt>なつ やす</rt></ruby>みもじきに<ruby><rb>終</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>わろうとしている。</span>／<span class="translation">The long summer holiday is coming to an end.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>日</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>地平線</rb><rt>ち へい せん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>彼方</rb><rt>かなた</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>沈</rb><rt>しず</rt></ruby>もうとしている。</span>／<span class="translation">The sun is setting over there on the horizon.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>のぼ</rt></ruby>り<ruby><rb>坂</rb><rt>ざか</rt></ruby>にさしかかろうとする<ruby><rb>所</rb><rt>ところ</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>車</rb><rt>くるま</rt></ruby>がエンストを<ruby><rb>起</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>こしてしまった。</span>／<span class="translation">I stalled the car’s engine as I approached the ascent.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>お<ruby><rb>風呂</rb><rt>ふ ろ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>はい</rt></ruby>ろうとしていたところに、<ruby><rb>電話</rb><rt>でん わ</rt></ruby>がかかってきた。</span>／<span class="translation">Just as I was about to get in the bath, the phone rang.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “just before/on the verge of” an action or change taking place. Typically used with non-volitional verbs such as 始まる(begin) and 終わる(end) but, when used in the form V-ようとするところ, it can also be used with volitional verbs. In instances in which non-volitional verbs are used, it is often a literary or poetic expression.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x102306"><span class="number">b. </span>V-ようとする〈attempt〉</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>息子</rb><rt>むすこ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>東大</rb><rt>とう だい</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>はい</rt></ruby>ろうとしている。</span>／<span class="translation">My son is trying to get into Tokyo University.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>は 25 <ruby><rb>歳</rb><rt>さい</rt></ruby>になる<ruby><rb>前</rb><rt>まえ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>とか<ruby><rb>結婚</rb><rt>けっ こん</rt></ruby>しようとしている。</span>／<span class="translation">She is trying to get married somehow before she turns 25.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>いくら<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>だ</rt></ruby>そうとしても、<ruby><rb>名前</rb><rt>な まえ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>だ</rt></ruby>せない。</span>／<span class="translation">However hard I try, I cannot remember his name.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>棚</rb><rt>たな</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>うえ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>花</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>びんをとろうとして、<ruby><rb>足</rb><rt>あし</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>踏</rb><rt>ふ</rt></ruby>みはずしてしまった。</span>／<span class="translation">I lost my footing trying to get the vase from the shelf.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>本人</rb><rt>ほん にん</rt></ruby>にやろうとする<ruby><rb>意欲</rb><rt>い よく</rt></ruby>がなければ、いくら<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>っても<ruby><rb>無駄</rb><rt>む だ</rt></ruby>です。</span>／<span class="translation">If the person <span class="noSeparate">him/her</span>self has no motivation, whatever you say is futile. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>寝</rb><rt>ね</rt></ruby>ようとすればするほど、<ruby><rb>目</rb><rt>め</rt></ruby>がさえてきてしまった。</span>／<span class="translation">The more I tried to sleep, the more wide-awake I became.</span></div><div class="explanation">Taking verbs which demonstrate intentional action, this expresses that attempts or efforts are made to realize that action. </div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x102355"><span class="number">c. </span>V-ようと（も／は）しない</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>うちの<ruby><rb>息子</rb><rt>むすこ</rt></ruby>はいくら<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>っても<ruby><rb>勉強</rb><rt>べん きょう</rt></ruby>をしようとしない。</span>／<span class="translation">Whatever I say, my son has no intention of studying.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>隣</rb><rt>となり</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>奥</rb><rt>おく</rt></ruby>さんは<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>会</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>っても<ruby><rb>挨拶</rb><rt>あい さつ</rt></ruby>ひとつしようとしない。</span>／<span class="translation">Even when she sees me, the lady next door never greets me.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>その<ruby><rb>患者</rb><rt>かん じゃ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べ<ruby><rb>物</rb><rt>もの</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>一切</rb><rt>いっ さい</rt></ruby>うけつけようとしない。</span>／<span class="translation">That patient won’t have any food.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>声</rb><rt>こえ</rt></ruby>をかけても<ruby><rb>振</rb><rt>ふ</rt></ruby>り<ruby><rb>向</rb><rt>む</rt></ruby>こうともしない。</span>／<span class="translation">Even when I call out, he will not even turn to face me.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>はこの<ruby><rb>見合</rb><rt>み あ</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>ばなし</rt></ruby>をおそらく<ruby><rb>承諾</rb><rt>しょう だく</rt></ruby>しようとはしないだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">I don’t think she’ll consent to this arranged marriage.</span></div><div class="explanation">Taking verbs which express intentional action, this expresses a lack of intention to carry out that action or deed. When も is inserted, as in V-ようともしない, it emphasizes a denial and means “have no intention even of ...ing.” As in example (5), は is also sometimes inserted.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x102398"><span class="number">9. </span>V-ようとはおもわなかった</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>こんなことになろうとは<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>わなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">I had no idea this kind of thing would happen.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>被害</rb><rt>ひ がい</rt></ruby>がこれほどまで<ruby><rb>広</rb><rt>ひろ</rt></ruby>がろうとは、<ruby><rb>専門家</rb><rt>せん もん か</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>予想</rb><rt>よ そう</rt></ruby>しなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">Even the experts didn’t predict that the damage would be so widespread.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>息子</rb><rt>むすこ</rt></ruby>が、たった<ruby><rb>一度</rb><rt>いち ど</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>受験</rb><rt>じゅ けん</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>司法</rb><rt>し ほう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>試験</rb><rt>し けん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>合格</rb><rt>ごう かく</rt></ruby>しようとは<ruby><rb>夢</rb><rt>ゆめ</rt></ruby>にも<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>わなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">I didn’t even dream that my son would pass the bar exam at just the first attempt.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>たったの<ruby><rb>五日</rb><rt>いつ か</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>論文</rb><rt>ろん ぶん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>完成</rb><rt>かん せい</rt></ruby>しようとは<ruby><rb>誰一人</rb><rt>だれひとり</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>想像</rb><rt>そう ぞう</rt></ruby>しなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">No one imagined that I would finish my thesis in just five days.</span></div><div class="explanation">Taking non-volitional verbs such as なる, means “that such a thing would happen was not predicted.”合格しよう(will pass) and 完成しよう(will do) of examples (3) and (4) express that the thing happened naturally or spontaneously and, as such, like 合格／完成できる and 合格／完成することになる, they do not express the speaker’s intention. Apart from 思う, verbs which follow are those such as 予想／想像する(predict/imagine) and always take the form -なかった. It is a written expression. </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x102435"><span class="number">10. </span>V-ようにもV-られない</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>頭</rb><rt>あたま</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>痛</rb><rt>いた</rt></ruby>くて、<ruby><rb>起</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>きようにも<ruby><rb>起</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>きられない。</span>／<span class="translation">My head hurts and I couldn’t get up even if I wanted to. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>まわりがうるさくて、<ruby><rb>落</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>ち<ruby><rb>着</rb><rt>つ</rt></ruby>いて<ruby><rb>考</rb><rt>かんが</rt></ruby>えようにも<ruby><rb>考</rb><rt>かんが</rt></ruby>えられない。</span>／<span class="translation">It’s noisy around me and, even though I want to calm down and think, I can’t.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>風</rb><rt>かぜ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>強</rb><rt>つよ</rt></ruby>すぎて<ruby><rb>走</rb><rt>はし</rt></ruby>ろうにも<ruby><rb>走</rb><rt>はし</rt></ruby>れない。</span>／<span class="translation">The wind is so strong and I can’t run however much I try.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>雨</rb><rt>あめ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>降</rb><rt>ふ</rt></ruby>っているので、<ruby><rb>外</rb><rt>そと</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>遊</rb><rt>あそ</rt></ruby>ぼうにも<ruby><rb>遊</rb><rt>あそ</rt></ruby>べない。</span>／<span class="translation">Because it’s raining, even though you want to play outside you can’t.</span></div><div class="explanation">Attached to verbs which demonstrate intentional actions, means “even though one intends to... one can’t.” The same verb is repeated before and after. It is often used in cases where something cannot be done regardless of a strong wish to do it.</div></body></html>