<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ないで</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0649.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ないこともない】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0651.xhtml">【ないである】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x60688">【ないで】</h1><div class="explanation">ないで is the <i>te</i>-form of a negated verb. It indicates the manner, situation, or circumstances in which the action or state referred to after ないで is realized.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x60706"><span class="number">1. </span>V-ないで〈attendant circumstances〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>息子</rb><rt>むすこ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>今朝</rb><rt>け さ</rt></ruby>もご<ruby><rb>飯</rb><rt>はん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べないで<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>かけた。</span>／<span class="translation">My son left the house again this morning without eating breakfast.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>一生</rb><rt>いっ しょう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>結婚</rb><rt>けっ こん</rt></ruby>しないで<ruby><rb>独身</rb><rt>どく しん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>通</rb><rt>とお</rt></ruby>した。</span>／<span class="translation">She didn’t marry, she remained single for her entire life.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>傘</rb><rt>かさ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>持</rb><rt>も</rt></ruby>たないで<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>かけて<ruby><rb>雨</rb><rt>あめ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>降</rb><rt>ふ</rt></ruby>られてしまった。</span>／<span class="translation">I went out without an umbrella and got rained on.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>予約</rb><rt>よ やく</rt></ruby>しないで<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ったら、<ruby><rb>満席</rb><rt>まん せき</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>はい</rt></ruby>れなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">I went without making a reservation, so I couldn’t get in because every seat was taken.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>歯</rb><rt>は</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>磨</rb><rt>みが</rt></ruby>かないで<ruby><rb>寝</rb><rt>ね</rt></ruby>てはいけません。</span>／<span class="translation">Don’t go to bed without brushing your teeth.</span></div><div class="explanation">Followed by a main verb clause X, V-ないでhas the meaning of “do X without doing Y.” In written language, ...ずに is also used. Cannot be replaced by V-なくて.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x60752"><span class="number">2. </span>V-ないで〈instead of〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>親</rb><rt>おや</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>ないで<ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>た。</span>／<span class="translation">The child came, but not the parents.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>ロンドンには<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>かないでパリとローマに<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>った。</span>／<span class="translation">Instead of London, I went to Paris and Rome.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>運動</rb><rt>うん どう</rt></ruby>してもちっともやせないで、かえって<ruby><rb>体重</rb><rt>たい じゅう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>少</rb><rt>すこ</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>増</rb><rt>ふ</rt></ruby>えた。</span>／<span class="translation">Even though I’m working out, I’m not losing weight at all—instead I’ve gained a little.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>頑張</rb><rt>がん ば</rt></ruby>っているのに<ruby><rb>成績</rb><rt>せい せき</rt></ruby>はちっともよくならないで、むしろ<ruby><rb>下</rb><rt>さ</rt></ruby>がってきている。</span>／<span class="translation">Even though I’m trying my best, my marks aren’t getting any better—if anything, they’re getting worse.</span></div><div class="explanation">V-ないで is used to make a contrastive statement about two things. Means “do such-and-such instead of doing something else,” or “such-and-such happens instead of something else.” Often implies that what follows V-ないで is a result that contradicts the speaker’s expectation or anticipation. In written language, ...ずに is also used.</div><div class="explanation">It is not impossible to replace V-ないで with V-なくて. However, なくて does not convey the contrastive meaning of 代わりに (instead of). Rather, it means that two situations or states of affairs have been realized at virtually the same time. Thus, when the speaker wants to express contrastive meaning, ないで must be used.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x60802"><span class="number">3. </span>V-ないで〈cause〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>がちっとも<ruby><rb>勉強</rb><rt>べん きょう</rt></ruby>しないで<ruby><rb>困</rb><rt>こま</rt></ruby>っています。</span>／<span class="translation">I don’t know what to do, because my child isn’t studying at all.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>やつが<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>ないで<ruby><rb>助</rb><rt>たす</rt></ruby>かった。</span>／<span class="translation">I was relieved that the guy didn’t come.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>試験</rb><rt>し けん</rt></ruby>にパスできないでがっかりした。</span>／<span class="translation">I was disappointed because I couldn’t pass the exam.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>朝</rb><rt>あさ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>起</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>きられないで<ruby><rb>授業</rb><rt>じゅ ぎょう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>遅</rb><rt>おく</rt></ruby>れた。</span>／<span class="translation">I was late for class because I couldn’t get up in the morning.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>大事故</rb><rt>だい じ こ</rt></ruby>にならないでよかった。</span>／<span class="translation">I’m glad it didn’t turn into a big accident.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “because someone does not do X” or “because something does not happen.” Often followed by expressions that indicate an emotion or evaluation, such as 困った (didn’t know what to do) in (1) and 助かった (was relieved) in (2), or expressions that present a chronological relationship between situations or events, as in (4). In this usage, ないで can be replaced relatively freely by なくて.</div></body></html>