<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>にとって</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0811.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【にて】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0813.xhtml">【にどと...ない】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x73141">【にとって】</h1><h4 class="info">［Nにとって］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>にとってこんな<ruby><rb>修理</rb><rt>しゅう り</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>でもないことです。</span>／<span class="translation">For him, such repairs are nothing. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>年金</rb><rt>ねん きん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>生活者</rb><rt>せいかつしゃ</rt></ruby>にとってはインフレが<ruby><rb>深刻</rb><rt>しん こく</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>問題</rb><rt>もん だい</rt></ruby>である。</span>／<span class="translation">For pensioners, inflation is a serious problem.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>度重</rb><rt>たび かさ</rt></ruby>なる<ruby><rb>自然</rb><rt>し ぜん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>災害</rb><rt>さい がい</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>国家</rb><rt>こっ か</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>再建</rb><rt>さい けん</rt></ruby>にとって<ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>きな<ruby><rb>痛手</rb><rt>いた で</rt></ruby>となった。</span>／<span class="translation">The succession of natural disasters became a huge obstacle to reconstructing the country. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>病床</rb><rt>びょう しょう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>にとっては、<ruby><rb>友人</rb><rt>ゆう じん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>励</rb><rt>はげ</rt></ruby>ましがなによりも<ruby><rb>有</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>り<ruby><rb>難</rb><rt>がた</rt></ruby>いものだった。</span>／<span class="translation">When I was sick in bed, I appreciated the encouragement of my friends more than anything.</span></div><div class="explanation">With a noun mostly expressing a person or an organization, expresses the meaning of “from the point of view.” May express the meaning of “considering that aspect” when it is preceded by a noun expressing a thing, state or an event, as shown in (3). Followed by some expression to show (in)ability or the speaker’s evaluation, such as むずかしい(difficult), 有り難い(grateful), or 深刻だ(serious). Cannot be followed by an expression to show the speaker’s attitude, such as 賛成, 反対 or 感謝する.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>その案は私にとって反対です。／For me, I disagree with the plan. </div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>私はその案に反対です。／I disagree with the plan.</div></body></html>