<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>とやら</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0637.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ともよい】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0639.xhtml">【とりわけ】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x59470">【とやら】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x59472"><span class="number">1. </span>Nとやら</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>例</rb><rt>れい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>啓子</rb><rt>けい こ</rt></ruby>さんとやらとはうまくいっていますか。</span>／<span class="translation">Are you getting along well with that Keiko-san, or whatever her name is?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>娘</rb><rt>むすめ</rt></ruby>が「ムサカ」とやらいうギリシャ<ruby><rb>料理</rb><rt>りょう り</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>作</rb><rt>つく</rt></ruby>ってくれました。</span>／<span class="translation">My daughter cooked me a Greek dish called something like <i>m</i><i>oussaka</i>.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “called something like...” and is used after a name that the speaker does not remember precisely. In (1), とやら is attached directly to a particle, but this can be considered to be an abbreviation of the phrase とやらいう人 (a person called something like...), with いう人 (a person called) omitted.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x59502"><span class="number">2. </span>...とやら</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>答案</rb><rt>とう あん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>て、<ruby><rb>先生</rb><rt>せん せい</rt></ruby>がびっくりした<ruby><rb>顔</rb><rt>かお</rt></ruby>をしていたとやら。</span>／<span class="translation">I heard that when the teacher saw my answers she looked astonished, or something.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>結局</rb><rt>けっ きょく</rt></ruby>あの<ruby><rb>二人</rb><rt>ふたり</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>結婚</rb><rt>けっ こん</rt></ruby>して、<ruby><rb>田舎</rb><rt>いなか</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>仲良</rb><rt>なか よ</rt></ruby>く<ruby><rb>暮</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>らしているとやら。</span>／<span class="translation">I heard that those two ended up getting married and are living happily together in the countryside, or something.</span></div><div class="explanation">とやら follows information that the speaker has heard from someone else and means, “it may not be completely accurate, but I heard something like this.” Although the meaning of とやら is similar to that of とか聞いている, とのことだ and そうだ, とやら conveys a strong sense that the information quoted is not very precise because the speaker’s recollection is vague. とやら is rarely used in everyday spoken language.</div></body></html>