<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>のではなかったか</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0869.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【のではないだろうか】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0871.xhtml">【のではなかろうか】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x77656">【のではなかったか】</h1><h4 class="info">［N／Na　なのではなかったか］</h4><h4 class="info">［A／V　のではなかったか］</h4><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x77665"><span class="number">1. </span>...のではなかったか〈doubt, question〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>当時</rb><rt>とう じ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>人々</rb><rt>ひと びと</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>人間</rb><rt>にん げん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>空</rb><rt>そら</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>飛</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>ぶなどということは<ruby><rb>考</rb><rt>かんが</rt></ruby>えもしなかったのではなかったか。</span>／<span class="translation">Isn’t it true that people those days never even imagined that human beings could fly through the sky? </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>古代人</rb><rt>こ だい じん</rt></ruby>にとってはこれも<ruby><rb>貴重</rb><rt>き ちょう</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>食物</rb><rt>しょく もつ</rt></ruby>なのではなかったか。</span>／<span class="translation">Wasn’t this also a valuable food for ancient people?</span></div><h4 class="reference">→<a href="part0487.xhtml#idtitlex1x44234">【ではなかったか】</a></h4><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x77687"><span class="number">2. </span>...のではなかったか〈criticism〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>あなたたちは<ruby><rb>規律</rb><rt>き りつ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>守</rb><rt>まも</rt></ruby>ると<ruby><rb>誓</rb><rt>ちか</rt></ruby>ったのではなかったか。</span>／<span class="translation">Didn’t you promise that you would obey the rules?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>これまでは<ruby><rb>平和</rb><rt>へい わ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>共存</rb><rt>きょう ぞん</rt></ruby>してきたのではなかったか。</span>／<span class="translation">Haven’t we co-existed peacefully up till now?</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to express the speaker’s criticism of the addressee or <span class="noSeparate">his/her</span> feeling of regret because the present situation has turned out to be contradictory to the one described in the preceding clause.</div></body></html>