<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>までに</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0948.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【まで】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0950.xhtml">【まま】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x91052">【までに】</h1><h4 class="info">［Nまでに］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-るまでに］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>レポートは<ruby><rb>来週</rb><rt>らい しゅう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>木曜日</rb><rt>もく よう び</rt></ruby>までに<ruby><rb>提出</rb><rt>てい しゅつ</rt></ruby>して<ruby><rb>下</rb><rt>くだ</rt></ruby>さい。</span>／<span class="translation">Please submit your report by Thursday of next week.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>何時</rb><rt>なん じ</rt></ruby>までに<ruby><rb>伺</rb><rt>うかが</rt></ruby>えばよろしいですか。</span>／<span class="translation">What time should I be there by?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>明日</rb><rt>あ す</rt></ruby>までにこの<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>済</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>ませてしまいたい。</span>／<span class="translation">I want to get this job finished by tomorrow.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>夏休</rb><rt>なつ やす</rt></ruby>みが<ruby><rb>終</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>わるまでにこの<ruby><rb>本</rb><rt>ほん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>読</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>んでしまいたい。</span>／<span class="translation">I want to finish reading this book by the end of summer vacation.</span></div><div class="explanation">Attached to nouns of time or clauses which show events, expresses the time frame or deadline of an action. When an expression which shows an action or function comes after this phrase, it shows that the action or function will take place at a point in time before the given time period or deadline.   </div><div class="explanation">...まで...する shows that an action or situation continues until a certain point in time, but ...までに...する does not denote continuity and demonstrates the occurrence of a certain event. Therefore, phrases expressing continuity cannot be used after ...までに.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>5時までにここで待っています。／I will be waiting here until five o’clock.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>5時までここで待っています。／I will be waiting here until five o’clock.</div><div class="explanation">Apart from demonstrating time frames, there is an idiom 参考までに that is used in letters, etc. Here it means “for reference” or “for your information.”</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>ご参考までに資料をお送りします。／I will send the documents for your reference.</div></body></html>