<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>なくてもいい</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0677.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【なくてはならない】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0679.xhtml">【なくともよい】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x62554">【なくてもいい】</h1><h4 class="info">［N／Na　でなくてもいい］</h4><h4 class="info">［A-くなくてもいい］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-なくてもいい］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby>はたっぷりあるから、そんなに<ruby><rb>急</rb><rt>いそ</rt></ruby>がなくてもいいですよ。</span>／<span class="translation">We have plenty of time, so there’s no need to rush.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>毎日</rb><rt>まい にち</rt></ruby>でなくてもいいから、ときどき<ruby><rb>運動</rb><rt>うん どう</rt></ruby>して<ruby><rb>下</rb><rt>くだ</rt></ruby>さい。</span>／<span class="translation">You don’t have to do it every day, but please get some exercise once in a while.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>この<ruby><rb>染料</rb><rt>せん りょう</rt></ruby>はお<ruby><rb>湯</rb><rt>ゆ</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>溶</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>かすんだけど、<ruby><rb>温度</rb><rt>おん ど</rt></ruby>はそんなに<ruby><rb>高</rb><rt>たか</rt></ruby>くなくてもいいよ。すぐ<ruby><rb>溶</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>けるから。</span>／<span class="translation">You dissolve this dye in hot water, but the temperature doesn’t have to be that high. It dissolves right away.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>忙</rb><rt>いそが</rt></ruby>しい<ruby><rb>場合</rb><rt>ば あい</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>無理</rb><rt>む り</rt></ruby>して<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>なくてもいいですよ。</span>／<span class="translation">If you’re busy at work, please don’t feel obligated to come.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “it is not necessary to do X.” Can be replaced by なくてもかまわない or なくても大丈夫. In formal Japanese, なくともよい, a more formal expression, may be used instead.</div></body></html>