<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>みせる</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0959.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【みこんで】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0961.xhtml">【みたいだ】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x92649">【みせる】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x92651"><span class="number">1. </span>...をみせる</h2><h4 class="info">［NがNに...をみせる］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>友</rb><rt>とも</rt></ruby>だちにアルバムをみせた。</span>／<span class="translation">I showed my friend the album.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>来月</rb><rt>らい げつ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>工場</rb><rt>こう じょう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>って、<ruby><rb>実際</rb><rt>じっ さい</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>製品</rb><rt>せい ひん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>作</rb><rt>つく</rt></ruby>っているところを<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>せてもらうことになった。</span>／<span class="translation">It has been decided that, next month, we will go to a factory and be shown how the products are actually made.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>その<ruby><rb>子</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>はうまく<ruby><rb>字</rb><rt>じ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>書</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>けるようになったのを<ruby><rb>母親</rb><rt>はは おや</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>せたくてしかたがないようだった。</span>／<span class="translation">That child just had to show his mother how good he had gotten at writing characters.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>家族</rb><rt>か ぞく</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>離</rb><rt>はな</rt></ruby>れて<ruby><rb>元</rb><rt>げん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>気</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>がなかった<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>も、<ruby><rb>最近</rb><rt>さい きん</rt></ruby>やっと<ruby><rb>笑顔</rb><rt>え がお</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>せるようになった。</span>／<span class="translation">Separated from his family and depressed, he has at last recently come to show us some smiles.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>9<ruby><rb>月</rb><rt>がつ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>はい</rt></ruby>って、さすがの<ruby><rb>猛暑</rb><rt>もう しょ</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>衰</rb><rt>おとろ</rt></ruby>えをみせるようになった。</span>／<span class="translation">The coming of September showed a decline in the usual summer heat.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>微熱</rb><rt>び ねつ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>続</rb><rt>つづ</rt></ruby>いたのであちこちの<ruby><rb>医者</rb><rt>い しゃ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>せたが、<ruby><rb>結局</rb><rt>けっ きょく</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>原因</rb><rt>げん いん</rt></ruby>はわからなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">Because my slight fever continued, I saw several doctors, but in the end the cause remained unknown.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means to “enable a person to see (something)” in examples (1)-(3). Means to show an internal or emotional state through attitude or facial expressions in (4). 医者にみせる in (6) means to receive a medical examination from a doctor. </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x92701"><span class="number">2. </span>かおをみせる</h2><h3 class="subsubtitle" id="idparagraphx1x92704"><span class="number"></span>すがたをみせる</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>このごろ<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>はちっとも<ruby><rb>学校</rb><rt>がっ こう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>顔</rb><rt>かお</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>せない。</span>／<span class="translation">Recently, he hasn’t put in a single appearance at school.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>久</rb><rt>ひさ</rt></ruby>しぶりだね。たまには<ruby><rb>顔</rb><rt>かお</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>せてくれよ。</span>／<span class="translation">Long time no see. You should put in an appearance once in a while.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>8<ruby><rb>時</rb><rt>じ</rt></ruby>ごろになって、やっと<ruby><rb>月</rb><rt>つき</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>雲</rb><rt>くも</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>晴</rb><rt>は</rt></ruby>れ<ruby><rb>間</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>顔</rb><rt>かお</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>せた。</span>／<span class="translation">When it got to around eight o’clock, the moon finally appeared through a break in the clouds.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>8<ruby><rb>時</rb><rt>じ</rt></ruby>ごろになって、やっと<ruby><rb>星</rb><rt>ほし</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>姿</rb><rt>すがた</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>せた。</span>／<span class="translation">At around eight o’clock we finally got a glimpse of the stars.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means that “a person arrives” or that “a thing which could not previously be seen becomes visible.”</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x92741"><span class="number">3. </span>Nが...を...みせる</h2><h4 class="info">［Nが...をNa にみせる］</h4><h4 class="info">［Nが...をA-くみせる］</h4><h4 class="info">［Nが...をV-ようにみせる］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>華</rb><rt>はな</rt></ruby>やかな<ruby><rb>衣装</rb><rt>い しょう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>実際</rb><rt>じっ さい</rt></ruby>より<ruby><rb>若</rb><rt>わか</rt></ruby>く<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>せている。</span>／<span class="translation">Showy clothing makes her look younger than she really is.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>明</rb><rt>あか</rt></ruby>るいライトが<ruby><rb>商品</rb><rt>しょう ひん</rt></ruby>をいっそうきれいに<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>せている。</span>／<span class="translation">Bright lighting makes goods look all the more beautiful.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>ショートカットの<ruby><rb>髪</rb><rt>かみ</rt></ruby>がいっそう<ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>活発</rb><rt>かっ ぱつ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>せている。</span>／<span class="translation">Her short haircut makes her look all the perkier.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>明</rb><rt>あか</rt></ruby>るい<ruby><rb>照明</rb><rt>しょう めい</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>商品</rb><rt>しょう ひん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>新鮮</rb><rt>しん せん</rt></ruby>にみせている。</span>／<span class="translation">Bright lighting makes the stock look fresh.</span></div><div class="explanation">Attached to a noun, this expresses the meaning that the thing denoted by the noun as the cause leads the observer to a certain feeling about it.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x92784"><span class="number">4. </span>...ようにみせる</h2><h4 class="info">［Nのようにみせる］</h4><h4 class="info">［Na なようにみせる］</h4><h4 class="info">［A-いようにみせる］</h4><h4 class="info">［Vようにみせる］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>犯人</rb><rt>はん にん</rt></ruby>は、わざとドアを<ruby><rb>壊</rb><rt>こわ</rt></ruby>して<ruby><rb>外部</rb><rt>がい ぶ</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>侵入</rb><rt>しん にゅう</rt></ruby>したように<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>せている。</span>／<span class="translation">The culprit intentionally damaged the door to make it look like he had entered from the outside.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>かけたように<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>せて、<ruby><rb>実</rb><rt>じつ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>家</rb><rt>いえ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>中</rb><rt>なか</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>隠</rb><rt>かく</rt></ruby>れていた。</span>／<span class="translation">Making it look as if she had gone out, in reality she was hiding inside the house.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>娘</rb><rt>むすめ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>家出</rb><rt>いえ で</rt></ruby>をあまり<ruby><rb>気</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>にしていないように<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>せてはいるが、<ruby><rb>本当</rb><rt>ほん  とう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>心配</rb><rt>しん ぱい</rt></ruby>でたまらないのだ。</span>／<span class="translation">He makes it seem as though he isn’t bothered by his daughter running  away from home, but really he is beside himself with worry.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses the meaning that, although something looks or is made to look a certain way, in reality it is different.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x92823"><span class="number">5. </span>V-てみせる<span class="reference">→<a href="part0494.xhtml#idtitlex1x44502">【てみせる】</a></span></h2></body></html>