<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>おもったら</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0102.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【おもえば】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0104.xhtml">【および】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x9120">【おもったら】</h1><h4 class="info">［N／Na　だとおもったら］</h4><h4 class="info">［A／V　とおもったら］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>息子</rb><rt>むすこ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>姿</rb><rt>すがた</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>えないと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>ったら、<ruby><rb>押</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>れの<ruby><rb>中</rb><rt>なか</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>寝</rb><rt>ね</rt></ruby>ていた。</span>／<span class="translation">I was wondering where my son could be, and there he was sleeping in the closet.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>なんだか<ruby><rb>寒</rb><rt>さむ</rt></ruby>いと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>ったら、<ruby><rb>窓</rb><rt>まど</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>開</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>いていたのか。</span>／<span class="translation">I was wondering why it was so chilly, but now I can see it’s because someone left the window open.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>めがねがないないと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>ったら、こんなところに<ruby><rb>置</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>忘</rb><rt>わす</rt></ruby>れていたよ。</span>／<span class="translation">I was wondering why I couldn’t find my glasses, but now I see that I left them here, of all places!</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>冷蔵庫</rb><rt>れい ぞう こ</rt></ruby>においしそうなケーキがあると<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>ったら、お<ruby><rb>客</rb><rt>きゃく</rt></ruby>さん<ruby><rb>用</rb><rt>よう</rt></ruby>だった。</span>／<span class="translation">I was thinking that the cake in the refrigerator looked delicious, but it was for our guests.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>最近</rb><rt>さい きん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>上田</rb><rt>うえ だ</rt></ruby>さんが<ruby><rb>学校</rb><rt>がっ こう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>ないと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>っていたら、<ruby><rb>交通</rb><rt>こう つう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>事故</rb><rt>じ こ</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>入院</rb><rt>にゅう いん</rt></ruby>しているらしい。</span>／<span class="translation">I was wondering why Ueda-san isn’t coming to school lately, and then I heard that she’s in the hospital because of a traffic accident.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>誰</rb><rt>だれ</rt></ruby>もいないのにうちに<ruby><rb>電気</rb><rt>でん き</rt></ruby>がついていると<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>ったら、<ruby><rb>弟</rb><rt>おとうと</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>遊</rb><rt>あそ</rt></ruby>びに<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>て<ruby><rb>勝手</rb><rt>かっ て</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>がり<ruby><rb>込</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>んでいたのだった。</span>／<span class="translation">I was wondering why the lights were on even though no one was home, but it turned out that my younger brother had dropped by for a visit and let himself in.</span></div><div class="explanation">Placed after a clause and expresses an unsettled feeling about something for which the cause or reason is unknown. Followed by a statement of the cause, reason, or explanation, which also indicates that the matter has been satisfactorily resolved for the speaker. Example (1) means “I thought it was strange that my son wasn’t here, but I found him sleeping in the closet, so then I understood,” and (2) means “I was wondering why it was chilly, but then I noticed that the window had been left open, so I could understand the reason.” When an inexplicable situation continues over a period of time, と思っていたら can be used, as in (5).</div></body></html>