<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>がはやいか</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0145.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【かのよう】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0147.xhtml">【かもしれない】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x12109">【がはやいか】</h1><h4 class="info">［V-るがはやいか］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>そのことばを<ruby><rb>聞</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>くがはやいか、<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>はその<ruby><rb>男</rb><rt>おとこ</rt></ruby>になぐりかかった。</span>／<span class="translation">As soon as he heard the word, he started hitting the man.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>その<ruby><rb>男</rb><rt>おとこ</rt></ruby>はジョッキをつかむがはやいか<ruby><rb>一気</rb><rt>いっ き</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>飲</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>みほした。</span>／<span class="translation">The instant the man picked up the beer mug, he drank it empty in one gulp.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>こどもは、<ruby><rb>学校</rb><rt>がっ こう</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>帰</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>って<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>ると、<ruby><rb>玄関</rb><rt>げん かん</rt></ruby>にカバンをおくが<ruby><rb>早</rb><rt>はや</rt></ruby>いか、また<ruby><rb>飛</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>び<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>だ</rt></ruby>していった。</span>／<span class="translation">After getting home from school, the child no sooner placed his bag in the entrance than he rushed out again. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>その<ruby><rb>鳥</rb><rt>とり</rt></ruby>は、ウサギをするどいツメでとらえるが<ruby><rb>早</rb><rt>はや</rt></ruby>いか、あっと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>う<ruby><rb>間</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>空</rb><rt>そら</rt></ruby>にまい<ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>がった。</span>／<span class="translation">As soon as the bird had caught the rabbit with its sharp claws, it immediately flew up into the sky.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means Y happens almost simultaneously with X. Similar to やいなや and とたんに. Used in written language.</div></body></html>