<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ごとし</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0214.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ことこのうえない】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0216.xhtml">【ことだ】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x17285">【ごとし】</h1><div class="explanation">A literary expression that is now used only in written language. ごとしis the form that is used at the end of a sentence, and the conjugated forms are ごときN and ごとくV. </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x17297"><span class="number">1. </span>ごとし</h2><h4 class="info">［Nのごとし］</h4><h4 class="info">［Nであるがごとし］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>光陰</rb><rt>こういん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>矢</rb><rt>や</rt></ruby>のごとし。</span>／<span class="translation">Time flies like an arrow.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby>というものは、<ruby><rb>矢</rb><rt>や</rt></ruby>のごとくはやくすぎさっていくものだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Time passes by quickly, just as an arrow flies. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>山田</rb><rt>やま だ</rt></ruby>ごときに<ruby><rb>負</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>けるものか。</span>／<span class="translation">I’ll never lose to someone like Yamada.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to compare one thing to another, like ...のようだ. The form Nごとき is usually followed by a noun to create the pattern NごときN, but sometimes Nごとき is used by itself as a noun, as in (3). This usage is limited to cases in which the meaning is accompanied by a negative evaluation. With the exception of proverbs and idioms, ようだ is now used more often than ごとし. </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x17332"><span class="number">2. </span>...かのごとし</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>はそのことを<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>っているはずなのに、まったく<ruby><rb>聞</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>いたことがないかのごとき<ruby><rb>態度</rb><rt>たい ど</rt></ruby>だった。</span>／<span class="translation">Though she should have known about it, she acted as if she had heard nothing at all.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>そのふたりはまずしかったが、<ruby><rb>世界中</rb><rt>せ かい じゅう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>自分</rb><rt>じ ぶん</rt></ruby>たちのものであるかのごとくしあわせであった。</span>／<span class="translation">Although the two of them were poor, they were as happy as if everything in the world belonged to them. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>「<ruby><rb>盗作</rb><rt>とう さく</rt></ruby>する」とは、<ruby><rb>他人</rb><rt>た にん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>作品</rb><rt>さく ひん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>自分</rb><rt>じ ぶん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>作品</rb><rt>さく ひん</rt></ruby>であるかのごとく<ruby><rb>発表</rb><rt>はっ ぴょう</rt></ruby>することである。</span>／<span class="translation"><i>T</i><i>oo</i><i>saku</i><i>-</i><i>suru</i><i> </i>(plagiarize) means to publish or present someone else’s work as if it were your own. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>あの<ruby><rb>政治家</rb><rt>せい じ か</rt></ruby>は、いつも<ruby><rb>優柔不断</rb><rt>ゆう じゅう ふ だん</rt></ruby>であるかのごとくふるまってはいるが、<ruby><rb>実</rb><rt>じつ</rt></ruby>はそうかんたんには<ruby><rb>真意</rb><rt>しん い</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>せないタヌキである。</span>／<span class="translation">That politician always acts as if he can’t make a decision, but he is really a sly fox who doesn't readily reveal his true intentions. </span></div><div class="explanation">This is used after a sentence, but in the case of nouns and <i>na</i>-adjectives, as in (3) and (4), it follows である and not だ. Means that something is not actually so, but looks as if it is. Now かのようだ is used more often. In particular, the dictionary form かのごとし is almost never used nowadays.</div></body></html>