<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ていただく</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0448.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ていけない】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0450.xhtml">【ていはしまいか】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x39685">【ていただく】</h1><div class="explanation">This is a form in which いただく is attached to the verb <i>te</i>-form. おR-いただく and ごNいただく are similar but more polite expressions.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x39703"><span class="number">1. </span>V-ていただく〈benefit〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>友達</rb><rt>とも だち</rt></ruby>のお<ruby><rb>父</rb><rt>とう</rt></ruby>さんに、<ruby><rb>駅</rb><rt>えき</rt></ruby>まで<ruby><rb>車</rb><rt>くるま</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>送</rb><rt>おく</rt></ruby>っていただきました。</span>／<span class="translation">My friend’s father kindly drove me to the station.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>高野</rb><rt>たか の</rt></ruby>さんに<ruby><rb>教</rb><rt>おし</rt></ruby>えていただいたんですが、この<ruby><rb>近</rb><rt>ちか</rt></ruby>くにいいマッサージ<ruby><rb>師</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>がいるそうですね。</span>／<span class="translation">I was told by Takano-san that there is a good masseur in this area.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>会議</rb><rt>かい ぎ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>日程</rb><rt>にっ てい</rt></ruby>は、もう、<ruby><rb>山下</rb><rt>やま した</rt></ruby>さんから<ruby><rb>教</rb><rt>おし</rt></ruby>えていただきました。</span>／<span class="translation">Yamashita-san has already explained to me the agenda for the meeting.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>《<ruby><rb>手紙</rb><rt>て がみ</rt></ruby>》<ruby><rb>珍</rb><rt>めずら</rt></ruby>しいものをたくさんお<ruby><rb>送</rb><rt>おく</rt></ruby>りいただき<ruby><rb>本当</rb><rt>ほん  とう</rt></ruby>にありがとうございました。</span>／<span class="translation">《in a letter》 Thank you so very much for sending many unusual things.</span></div><div class="explanation">The humble form of ...てもらう. Expresses the meaning that someone does an action for the speaker or someone on the listener’s side. Usually implies that the recipient is aware of receiving a favor or benefit. に is normally used for the person who does the favor, but から may also be used if a transfer of information or things is being expressed.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x39743"><span class="number">2. </span>V-ていただく〈instructions〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>まず、1<ruby><rb>階</rb><rt>かい</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>受</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>け<ruby><rb>付</rb><rt>つ</rt></ruby>けをすませていただきます。それから3<ruby><rb>階</rb><rt>かい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>ほう</rt></ruby>にいらして<ruby><rb>下</rb><rt>くだ</rt></ruby>さい。</span>／<span class="translation">First of all, please complete the registration on the first floor, and then continue up to the third floor.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>この<ruby><rb>書類</rb><rt>しょ るい</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>名前</rb><rt>な まえ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>書</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>いていただきます。そして、ここに<ruby><rb>印鑑</rb><rt>いん かん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>押</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>していただきます。</span>／<span class="translation">We will first ask you to write your name here. Then please stamp your seal here.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used when giving polite instructions. Can only be used by the person giving instructions. Instead of V-ていただく, it often takes the form お／ご...いただく, as follows.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>3才以下のお子様はコンサート会場への入場をご遠慮いただきます。／We ask that children under three refrain from entering the concert venue.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>クレジットカードはご利用いただけません。／I’m afraid credit cards cannot be used.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x39786"><span class="number">3. </span>V-ていただきたい</h2><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><span class="number">A:</span>この<ruby><rb>次</rb><rt>つぎ</rt></ruby>からは、<ruby><rb>間違</rb><rt>ま ちが</rt></ruby>えないでいただきたいですね。</span>／<span class="translation">After this, I should hope there won’t be any more mistakes.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>はい、<ruby><rb>申</rb><rt>もう</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>訳</rb><rt>わけ</rt></ruby>ございませんでした。</span>／<span class="translation">Yes, I’m terribly sorry.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>この<ruby><rb>忙</rb><rt>いそが</rt></ruby>しいときにすみません、あした<ruby><rb>休</rb><rt>やす</rt></ruby>ませていただきたいんですが...。</span>／<span class="translation">I’m sorry to ask at this busy time, but I’d like to have tomorrow off if I could.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>すみません、もう<ruby><rb>少</rb><rt>すこ</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>席</rb><rt>せき</rt></ruby>をつめていただきたいんですが。</span>／<span class="translation">Excuse me, could you put the chairs a little closer to each other?</span></div><div class="explanation">A humble expression corresponding to ...てもらいたい. Used when describing something that one wants the listener to do. If used in the ...ていただきたい form, often expresses a strong demand, although the form itself is polite. The form ...ていただきたいのですが, where the sentence is not finished, is used when making a hesitant request.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x39832"><span class="number">4. </span>V-ていただける〈request〉</h2><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><span class="number">A:</span>ご<ruby><rb>注文</rb><rt>ちゅう もん</rt></ruby>のお<ruby><rb>品</rb><rt>しな</rt></ruby>ですが、<ruby><rb>取</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>り<ruby><rb>寄</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>せますので、3<ruby><rb>日</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>ほど<ruby><rb>待</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>っていただけますか。</span>／<span class="translation">The goods you ordered need to be sent for, so could you wait for three days or so?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>ええ、かまいません。</span>／<span class="translation">Yes, that’s no problem.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>これ、<ruby><rb>贈</rb><rt>おく</rt></ruby>り<ruby><rb>物</rb><rt>もの</rt></ruby>にしたいんですが、<ruby><rb>包</rb><rt>つつ</rt></ruby>んでいただけますか。</span>／<span class="translation">I want to make this a gift—could you wrap it for me?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><span class="number">A:</span>わたしも<ruby><rb>手伝</rb><rt>て つだ</rt></ruby>いに<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>ますよ。</span>／<span class="translation">I’ll come and help, too.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>そうですか。じゃあ、<ruby><rb>日曜日</rb><rt>にち よう び</rt></ruby>のお<ruby><rb>昼頃</rb><rt>ひる ごろ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>ていただけますか。</span>／<span class="translation">Is that so? Well, could you come around lunchtime on Sunday?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>タクシーがまだ<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>ませんので、あと5<ruby><rb>分</rb><rt>ふん</rt></ruby>ぐらい<ruby><rb>待</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>っていただけませんか。</span>／<span class="translation">The taxi hasn’t arrived yet, so could you wait for five more minutes?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>先生</rb><rt>せん せい</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>論文</rb><rt>ろん ぶん</rt></ruby>ができたんですが、ちょっと<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>ていただけませんか。</span>／<span class="translation"><i>Sensei</i> (Professor), my paper is finished, so may I ask you to look at it for me?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span>そのことはぜひ<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>りたいんです。もし<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なに</rt></ruby>か<ruby><rb>詳</rb><rt>くわ</rt></ruby>しいことがわかったら、<ruby><rb>連絡</rb><rt>れん らく</rt></ruby>していただけませんか。</span>／<span class="translation">I would really like to know about this. May I ask you to contact me if you learn of any details?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（7）</span>5<ruby><rb>分</rb><rt>ふん</rt></ruby>ほど<ruby><rb>待</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>っていただける？</span>／<span class="translation">Could you wait for five minutes or so?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（8）</span>こちらにいらしていただけない？</span>／<span class="translation">Would you come this way?</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses a polite request by using いただける, the potential form of いただく. いただけませんか is a somewhat more hesitant expression than いただけますか, and it is often used when you don’t think the listener would necessarily agree to the request. Examples (7) and (8) are used when a woman makes a friendly request in a refined manner of someone of the same status or below. お／ご...いただける, an even politer form, is also often used.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>修理に少し時間がかかっています。すみませんが、もう少々お待ちいただけないでしょうか。／The repairs are taking a little time. I’m sorry, but could you wait a little longer?</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x39928"><span class="number">5. </span>V-ていただけるとありがたい</h2><h3 class="subsubtitle" id="idparagraphx1x39931"><span class="number"></span>V-ていただけるとうれしい</h3><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>がやりましょう。</span>／<span class="translation">I’ll do it.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>そうですか。そうしていただけると<ruby><rb>助</rb><rt>たす</rt></ruby>かります。</span>／<span class="translation">Can you? That would be very helpful.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>一人</rb><rt>ひとり</rt></ruby>では<ruby><rb>心細</rb><rt>こころ ぼそ</rt></ruby>いんで、いっしょに<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>っていただけるとうれしいんですけれど。</span>／<span class="translation">It would be lonely by myself, so I’d be happy if you could go with me.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>《<ruby><rb>手紙</rb><rt>て がみ</rt></ruby>》お<ruby><rb>返事</rb><rt>へん じ</rt></ruby>がいただければ<ruby><rb>幸</rb><rt>さいわ</rt></ruby>いです。</span>／<span class="translation">《in a letter》 We would appreciate a reply.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used with suppositional expressions such as ...ば, ...たら, ...と and describes a situation which will be favorable to the speaker if the listener takes the action. The speaker’s reaction is expressed by such phrases as ありがたい (grateful),うれしい (pleased), or 助かる (be saved trouble).</div></body></html>