<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ところ2</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0576.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ところ<sub class="variation">1</sub>】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0578.xhtml">【どころ】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x54284">【ところ<sub class="variation">2</sub>】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x54290"><span class="number">1. </span>V-たところ〈resultative〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>先生</rb><rt>せん せい</rt></ruby>にお<ruby><rb>願</rb><rt>ねが</rt></ruby>いしたところ、<ruby><rb>早速</rb><rt>さっそく</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>承諾</rb><rt>しょう だく</rt></ruby>のお<ruby><rb>返事</rb><rt>へん じ</rt></ruby>をいただいた。</span>／<span class="translation">On making a request of my teacher, I immediately received a reply of consent. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>駅</rb><rt>えき</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>遺失物</rb><rt>い しつ ぶつ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>係</rb><rt>がかり</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>問</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>合</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>わせたところ、<ruby><rb>届</rb><rt>とど</rt></ruby>いているとのことだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Upon contacting the lost and found office at the station, I was told that my article had been turned in. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>ホテルに<ruby><rb>電話</rb><rt>でん わ</rt></ruby>したところ、そのような<ruby><rb>名</rb><rt>な</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>前</rb><rt>まえ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>泊</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>まっていないそうだ。</span>／<span class="translation">When I called the hotel, I was told that there was no one by that name staying there. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>教室</rb><rt>きょう しつ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ってみたところが、<ruby><rb>学生</rb><rt>がく せい</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>一人</rb><rt>ひとり</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>ていなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">When I went and took a look at the classroom, there wasn't a single student there. </span></div><div class="explanation">ところ is attached to the <i>ta</i>-form of an action verb to express the occurrence of a situation and the triggering of a discovery. The situations that appear before and after this expression are not in a direct cause-effect relationship; rather, their relationship is something like “when I did..., by chance/it so happened that such-and-such was the case.” The situation in the second clause is a discovery on the part of the speaker that was triggered by the action in the first clause, and this discovery is stated using language that denotes a previously-realized fact. Sometimes ところ is followed by the particle が, as in (4), creating the form V-たところが. In this case, the second clause usually expresses a situation contrary to expectation.  </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x54333"><span class="number">2. </span>V-たところが〈adversative connective〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>親切</rb><rt>しん せつ</rt></ruby>のつもりで<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ったところがかえって<ruby><rb>恨</rb><rt>うら</rt></ruby>まれてしまった。</span>／<span class="translation">I spoke with the intention of being kind, and instead I find myself being resented.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>高</rb><rt>たか</rt></ruby>いお<ruby><rb>金</rb><rt>かね</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>だ</rt></ruby>して<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>ったところが、すぐ<ruby><rb>壊</rb><rt>こわ</rt></ruby>れてしまった。</span>／<span class="translation">I spent a lot of money to buy it, and it broke right away. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>終</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>わって<ruby><rb>急</rb><rt>いそ</rt></ruby>いで<ruby><rb>駆</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>けつけてみたところが、<ruby><rb>講演</rb><rt>こう えん</rt></ruby>はもうほとんど<ruby><rb>終</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>わってしまっていた。</span>／<span class="translation">After finishing work I rushed to get there as soon as I could, only to find that the performance was already almost over. </span></div><div class="explanation">This adversative usage can be replaced by のに (even though) and expresses that an outcome is contradictory to anticipation or expectation. In contrast to the resultative usage shown above, が is usually not omitted.</div></body></html>