<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>をのぞいて</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part1077.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【をとわず】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part1079.xhtml">【をふまえ】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x108114">【をのぞいて】</h1><h4 class="info">［Nをのぞいて（は）］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>山田</rb><rt>やま だ</rt></ruby>さんをのぞいて、みんな<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>ています。</span>／<span class="translation">Everyone is coming except Yamada-san.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>火曜日</rb><rt>か よう び</rt></ruby>をのぞいて（は）だいたいあいています。</span>／<span class="translation">We are generally open apart from on Tuesdays.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>その<ruby><rb>国</rb><rt>くに</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>真冬</rb><rt>ま ふゆ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>一時期</rb><rt>いち じ き</rt></ruby>をのぞいて（は）だいたい<ruby><rb>温暖</rb><rt>おん だん</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>気候</rb><rt>き こう</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">Apart from in midwinter, that country has a generally warm climate.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>全体的</rb><rt>ぜん たい てき</rt></ruby>には、この<ruby><rb>問題</rb><rt>もん だい</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>除</rb><rt>のぞ</rt></ruby>いて、ほぼ<ruby><rb>解決</rb><rt>かい けつ</rt></ruby>したと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ってよいだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">On the whole, apart from this problem, I think we can say it is settled.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “with that as an exception.” It is a written expression. In speech ...をのぞけば or ...のほかは are often used.</div></body></html>