<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>にたえない</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0801.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【にたいする】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0803.xhtml">【にたえる】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x72548">【にたえない】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x72550"><span class="number">1. </span>V-るにたえない</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>幼</rb><rt>おさな</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>朝</rb><rt>あさ</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>晩</rb><rt>ばん</rt></ruby>まで<ruby><rb>通</rb><rt>とお</rt></ruby>りで<ruby><rb>物乞</rb><rt>もの ご</rt></ruby>いをしている<ruby><rb>姿</rb><rt>すがた</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>るにたえない。</span>／<span class="translation">It is unbearable to see young children begging on the street all day long.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>近</rb><rt>ちか</rt></ruby>ごろの<ruby><rb>週刊誌</rb><rt>しゅう かん し</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>暴露</rb><rt>ばく ろ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>記事</rb><rt>き じ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>多</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>く、<ruby><rb>読</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>むにたえない。</span>／<span class="translation">I can’t stand reading recent weekly magazines because they have a lot of exposés.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>地震</rb><rt>じ しん</rt></ruby>のあと、<ruby><rb>町</rb><rt>まち</rt></ruby>はパニック<ruby><rb>状態</rb><rt>じょう たい</rt></ruby>となった。<ruby><rb>暴徒</rb><rt>ぼう と</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>次々</rb><rt>つぎ つぎ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>商店</rb><rt>しょう てん</rt></ruby>をおそい、<ruby><rb>正視</rb><rt>せい し</rt></ruby>するにたえない<ruby><rb>光景</rb><rt>こう けい</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>繰</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>り<ruby><rb>広</rb><rt>ひろ</rt></ruby>げられた。</span>／<span class="translation">After the earthquake, the whole town panicked. Mobs attacked shops one after another and an unbearable sight unfolded before our eyes.  </span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses the meaning that it is hard to see or hear something because its state is dreadful. Can be used with a few specific types of verbs, such as 見る, 読む, and正視する.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x72581"><span class="number">2. </span>Nにたえない</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>このようなお<ruby><rb>言葉</rb><rt>こと ば</rt></ruby>をいただき、<ruby><rb>感謝</rb><rt>かん しゃ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>念</rb><rt>ねん</rt></ruby>にたえません。</span>／<span class="translation">I cannot be grateful enough to you for giving me such a compliment.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>晩年</rb><rt>ばん ねん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>近</rb><rt>ちか</rt></ruby>くなってボランティア<ruby><rb>活動</rb><rt>かつ どう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>通</rb><rt>つう</rt></ruby>じて<ruby><rb>若</rb><rt>わか</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>人々</rb><rt>ひと びと</rt></ruby>とこのようなすばらしい<ruby><rb>出会</rb><rt>で あ</rt></ruby>いがあろうとは<ruby><rb>考</rb><rt>かんが</rt></ruby>えてもみないことであった。<ruby><rb>感激</rb><rt>かん げき</rt></ruby>にたえない。</span>／<span class="translation">I had never thought about such wonderful encounters with young people through volunteer work in my later years. It’s absolutely wonderful.</span></div><div class="explanation">With some limited types of nouns, such as 感謝 (gratitude) and 感激 ((the feeling of being) deeply moved), Nにたえない is used to emphasize the meaning of the noun. Usually used in formal speech.</div></body></html>