<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ろく</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part1049.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【れる<sub class="variation">2</sub>】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part1051.xhtml">【ろくろく】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x105913">【ろく】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x105915"><span class="number">1. </span>ろくなN...ない</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>こんな<ruby><rb>安月給</rb><rt>やす げっ きゅう</rt></ruby>ではろくな<ruby><rb>家</rb><rt>いえ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>住</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>めない。</span>／<span class="translation">I can’t live in a decent home on such a low salary.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>誰</rb><rt>だれ</rt></ruby>もこの<ruby><rb>言葉</rb><rt>こと ば</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>らないのか。まったくこの<ruby><rb>課</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>にはろくな<ruby><rb>奴</rb><rt>やつ</rt></ruby>がいないな。</span>／<span class="translation">Isn’t there anyone who knows this word? I swear, there really is no one I can count on in this department.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>上司</rb><rt>じょう し</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>怒</rb><rt>おこ</rt></ruby>られるし、<ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>にはふられるし、ろくなことがない。</span>／<span class="translation">My boss is mad at me, my girlfriend’s giving me the cold shoulder—nothing’s any good.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><span class="number">A:</span>どうもごちそうさまでした。</span>／<span class="translation">Thank you. That was a feast.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>いいえ、<ruby><rb>最近</rb><rt>さい きん</rt></ruby>ろくなおかまいもできませんで。</span>／<span class="translation">Don’t mention it—I haven’t done anything special for you recently.</span></div><div class="explanation">Shows an unsatisfactory or worse than average thing.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x105964"><span class="number">2. </span>ろくでもないN</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>花子</rb><rt>はな こ</rt></ruby>はろくでもない<ruby><rb>男</rb><rt>おとこ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>夢中</rb><rt>む ちゅう</rt></ruby>になっている。</span>／<span class="translation">Hanako is infatuated with a good-for-nothing man.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>そんなろくでもない<ruby><rb>本</rb><rt>ほん</rt></ruby>ばかり<ruby><rb>読</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>んでいるから、<ruby><rb>成績</rb><rt>せい せき</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>悪</rb><rt>わる</rt></ruby>くなるのよ。</span>／<span class="translation">Because you only read such worthless books, your grades are suffering.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><span class="number">A:</span>そんなに<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>がいやなら、<ruby><rb>早</rb><rt>はや</rt></ruby>いとこお<ruby><rb>見合</rb><rt>み あ</rt></ruby>いでもして<ruby><rb>結婚</rb><rt>けっ こん</rt></ruby>したらどう。</span>／<span class="translation">If you dislike work so much, how about quickly having an arranged marriage? </span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>そんなろくでもないこと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>わないでよ。</span>／<span class="translation">Don’t say such stupid things!</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses that a thing is worthless, good-for-nothing, or stupid.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x106007"><span class="number">3. </span>ろくに V-ない</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>テストも<ruby><rb>近</rb><rt>ちか</rt></ruby>いというのに、あの<ruby><rb>子</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>ったらろくに<ruby><rb>勉強</rb><rt>べん きょう</rt></ruby>もしないんだから。</span>／<span class="translation">Even though the test is soon, that child will not study enough.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>あいつは<ruby><rb>昼間</rb><rt>ひる ま</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>酒</rb><rt>さけ</rt></ruby>ばかり<ruby><rb>飲</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>んでろくに<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>もしないくせに、<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べるときは<ruby><rb>人一倍</rb><rt>ひといちばい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べる。</span>／<span class="translation">Even though that guy just only drinks <i>sake</i> from noontime on and hardly does any worthwhile work, when it’s time to eat he puts away as much as anyone. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>せっかく<ruby><rb>海</rb><rt>うみ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>たというのに、<ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>はろくに<ruby><rb>泳</rb><rt>およ</rt></ruby>ぎもしないで<ruby><rb>肌</rb><rt>はだ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>焼</rb><rt>や</rt></ruby>いてばかりいた。</span>／<span class="translation">We finally came to the sea but she hardly swam at all and just sunbathed.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>ろくに<ruby><rb>予習</rb><rt>よ しゅう</rt></ruby>しなくたって、あの<ruby><rb>授業</rb><rt>じゅ ぎょう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>先生</rb><rt>せん せい</rt></ruby>がやさしいから<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>とかなる。</span>／<span class="translation">I haven’t prepared enough but the teacher of that class is easy-going so I’ll manage somehow.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>そんな<ruby><rb>雑誌</rb><rt>ざっ し</rt></ruby>、ろくに<ruby><rb>読</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>まなくてもだいたいどんなことが<ruby><rb>書</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>いてあるかは<ruby><rb>見当</rb><rt>けん とう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>付</rb><rt>つ</rt></ruby>くよ。</span>／<span class="translation">Even without reading much of that kind of magazine, I have a general idea of what sort of things are written in it.</span></div><div class="explanation">Shows that something is not done to one’s satisfaction. Means “almost not...” and “not (done) enough.”</div></body></html>