<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>にいわせれば</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0746.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【にいたる】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0748.xhtml">【において】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x69985">【にいわせれば】</h1><h4 class="info">［Nにいわせれば］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>あの<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>わせれば、こんな<ruby><rb>辞書</rb><rt>じ しょ</rt></ruby>はまったく<ruby><rb>使</rb><rt>つか</rt></ruby>いものにならないということらしい。</span>／<span class="translation">According to him, this dictionary seems to be totally useless.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>映画</rb><rt>えい が</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>好</rb><rt>ず</rt></ruby>きのいとこに<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>わせれば、この<ruby><rb>映画</rb><rt>えい が</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>映像</rb><rt>えい ぞう</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>音楽</rb><rt>おん がく</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>見事</rb><rt>み ごと</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>調和</rb><rt>ちょう わ</rt></ruby>した、<ruby><rb>素晴</rb><rt>す ば</rt></ruby>らしい<ruby><rb>作品</rb><rt>さく ひん</rt></ruby>だという<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はなし</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">According to my cousin, who likes movies, this movie was an excellent piece of work in which the picture and music harmonize very well with each other. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>あなたは<ruby><rb>気</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>っているかもしれないが、<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>わせればそんな<ruby><rb>作品</rb><rt>さく ひん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>素人</rb><rt>しろうと</rt></ruby>のお<ruby><rb>遊</rb><rt>あそ</rt></ruby>びみたいなものだ。</span>／<span class="translation">You may like it, but if I may say so, this work is that of an amateur at play. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>わせると、<ruby><rb>今度</rb><rt>こん ど</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>つかった<ruby><rb>恐竜</rb><rt>きょう りゅう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>化石</rb><rt>か せき</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>進化</rb><rt>しん か</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>歴史</rb><rt>れき し</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>変</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>えるかもしれないような<ruby><rb>重要</rb><rt>じゅう よう</rt></ruby>なものなんだそうだ。</span>／<span class="translation">According to him, the dinosaur fossil which has recently been found is so important that it may change evolutionary history. </span></div><div class="explanation">With a noun expressing a person, means “according to the person.” Used to state that the view is supported by the speaker’s firm confidence. </div></body></html>