<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>かねない</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0141.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【かにみえる】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0143.xhtml">【かねる】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x11982">【かねない】</h1><h4 class="info">［R-かねない］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>風邪</rb><rt>か ぜ</rt></ruby>だからといってほうっておくと、<ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>きい<ruby><rb>病気</rb><rt>びょう き</rt></ruby>になりかねない。</span>／<span class="translation">If you just think it’s a cold and let it go, it may turn into a serious illness.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>君</rb><rt>きみ</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>がそんなことをするはずがないと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>っているそうだが、ぼくはあいつならやりかねないと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>うけどね。</span>／<span class="translation">I hear you’re saying you’d never expect him to do such a thing, but I wouldn’t put it past him to do it.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>政府</rb><rt>せい ふ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>今回</rb><rt>こん かい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>決定</rb><rt>けっ てい</rt></ruby>はいくつかの<ruby><rb>問題点</rb><rt>もん だい てん</rt></ruby>をはらんでおり、<ruby><rb>近隣</rb><rt>きんりん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>諸国</rb><rt>しょ こく</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>反発</rb><rt>はん ぱつ</rt></ruby>をまねきかねない。</span>／<span class="translation">This decision by the government entails some problems and may invite some resistance from neighboring countries.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>今回</rb><rt>こん かい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>土砂崩</rb><rt>ど しゃ くず</rt></ruby>れは<ruby><rb>二次</rb><rt>にじ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>災害</rb><rt>さい がい</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>引</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>起</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>こしかねないものであり、<ruby><rb>対策</rb><rt>たい さく</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>急</rb><rt>いそ</rt></ruby>がねばならない。</span>／<span class="translation">This landslide may lead to a secondary disaster, so countermeasures have to be taken quickly.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means there is a possibility or a danger of something. Similar to かもしれない and ないとはいえない, but かねない can only be used for something the speaker evaluates negatively.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>私のこどものこの病気はなおりかねない。／This disease of my child’s may be cured.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>私のこどものこの病気はなおるかもしれない。／This disease of my child’s may be cured.</div><div class="explanation"> A formal expression often used in written language.</div></body></html>