<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>にかかわる</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0756.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【にかかわらず】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0758.xhtml">【にかぎったことではない】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x70390">【にかかわる】</h1><h4 class="info">［Nにかかわる］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>命</rb><rt>いのち</rt></ruby>にかかわる<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>をするにはそれなりの<ruby><rb>覚悟</rb><rt>かく ご</rt></ruby>がいる。</span>／<span class="translation">When you have a job that affects whether people live or die, you need to be ready for anything.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>こんなひどい<ruby><rb>商品</rb><rt>しょう ひん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>売</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>ったら<ruby><rb>店</rb><rt>みせ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>評判</rb><rt>ひょう ばん</rt></ruby>にかかわる。</span>／<span class="translation">Selling such poor products affects our shop’s reputation.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>例</rb><rt>れい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>議員</rb><rt>ぎ いん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>武器</rb><rt>ぶ き</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>密輸</rb><rt>みつ ゆ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>関係</rb><rt>かん けい</rt></ruby>していたかどうかはっきりさせなければならない。これは<ruby><rb>政党</rb><rt>せい とう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>名誉</rb><rt>めい よ</rt></ruby>にかかわる<ruby><rb>重大</rb><rt>じゅう だい</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>問題</rb><rt>もん だい</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">We should make it clear whether the councilor in question was involved in smuggling arms. This is an important matter which affects the party’s honor.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>たとえ<ruby><rb>噂</rb><rt>うわさ</rt></ruby>でも<ruby><rb>倒産</rb><rt>とう さん</rt></ruby>しそうだなどという<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はなし</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>広</rb><rt>ひろ</rt></ruby>まると、<ruby><rb>会社</rb><rt>かい しゃ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>存続</rb><rt>そん ぞく</rt></ruby>にかかわる。</span>／<span class="translation">If a rumor goes around that the company is about to go bankrupt, it affects the continuing existence of the company.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>あんな<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>にいつまでもかかわっていたら、あなたまで<ruby><rb>評判</rb><rt>ひょう ばん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>落</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>としてしまいますよ。</span>／<span class="translation">If you continue to be mixed up with such a person, you will hurt your reputation, too. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span>この<ruby><rb>裁判</rb><rt>さい ばん</rt></ruby>にかかわって<ruby><rb>以来</rb><rt>い らい</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>子</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>どもの<ruby><rb>人権</rb><rt>じん けん</rt></ruby>について<ruby><rb>深</rb><rt>ふか</rt></ruby>く<ruby><rb>考</rb><rt>かんが</rt></ruby>えるようになった。</span>／<span class="translation">Since I began to be involved in this trial, I have been thinking deeply about children’s human rights.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（7）</span><ruby><rb>事件</rb><rt>じ けん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>起</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>きてから<ruby><rb>十年</rb><rt>じゅう ねん</rt></ruby>たった。いつまでもこの<ruby><rb>事件</rb><rt>じ けん</rt></ruby>にかかわっているわけにはいかないが、いまだに<ruby><rb>犯人</rb><rt>はん にん</rt></ruby>はつかまっていない。</span>／<span class="translation">It is ten years since this incident happened. I can’t be involved in it forever, but the culprit has not been arrested yet. </span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses the meaning of “to affect” or “to be involved.” にかかわる in (1)-(4) means “to affect,” and the noun is chosen to express something influential such as 名誉 (honor), 評判 (reputation), 生死 (life and death) or 合否 (pass or failure). In contrast, にかかわる in (5)-(7) means “to be involved” or “to be linked,” and the noun is used to express a person, profession, or an incident. </div></body></html>