<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>てもしかたがない</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0503.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【てもさしつかえない】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0505.xhtml">【でもって】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x46547">【てもしかたがない】</h1><h4 class="info">［N／Na　でもしかたがない］</h4><h4 class="info">［A-くてもしかたがない］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-てもしかたがない］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>このレポートでは、やりなおしを<ruby><rb>命</rb><rt>めい</rt></ruby>じられても<ruby><rb>仕方</rb><rt>し かた</rt></ruby>がない。</span>／<span class="translation">With this report, it’s no wonder I’ve been ordered to do it over again.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>あんないいかげんな<ruby><rb>練習</rb><rt>れん しゅう</rt></ruby>では、<ruby><rb>一回戦</rb><rt>いっ かい せん</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>負</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>けてもしかたがない。</span>／<span class="translation">With such sloppy practice, it’s no wonder they lost the first match.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>あんなに<ruby><rb>雪</rb><rt>ゆき</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>降</rb><rt>ふ</rt></ruby>っては、<ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>通</rb><rt>どお</rt></ruby>りに<ruby><rb>着</rb><rt>つ</rt></ruby>けなくてもしかたがない。</span>／<span class="translation">With that heavy a snowfall, it can’t be helped if they don’t arrive on time.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>これだけたくさんの<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>がいては、<ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>がみつけられなくても<ruby><rb>仕方</rb><rt>し かた</rt></ruby>がない。</span>／<span class="translation">With this many people around, it’s no surprise we can’t find her.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>チームの<ruby><rb>選手</rb><rt>せん しゅ</rt></ruby>にけが<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>にん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>多</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>かったから、<ruby><rb>今回</rb><rt>こん かい</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>最下位</rb><rt>さい か い</rt></ruby>でもしかたがない。</span>／<span class="translation">There were a lot of injured players on the team, so ending up in last place this time was unavoidable.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>物</rb><rt>もの</rt></ruby>にいくひまがないから、<ruby><rb>今夜</rb><rt>こん や</rt></ruby>のパーティーは<ruby><rb>古</rb><rt>ふる</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>服</rb><rt>ふく</rt></ruby>でもしかたがない。</span>／<span class="translation">I don’t have time to go shopping, so I’ll have to wear something old to the party tonight.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（7）</span>このところ<ruby><rb>雨</rb><rt>あめ</rt></ruby>ばかりだから、ビアガーデンのお<ruby><rb>客</rb><rt>きゃく</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>少</rb><rt>すく</rt></ruby>なくてもしかたがない。</span>／<span class="translation">The small number of customers at the beer gardens is to be expected, with all the rain we’ve had recently.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（8）</span>この<ruby><rb>辺</rb><rt>へん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>便利</rb><rt>べん り</rt></ruby>だから、マンションの<ruby><rb>値段</rb><rt>ね だん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>高</rb><rt>たか</rt></ruby>くても<ruby><rb>仕方</rb><rt>し かた</rt></ruby>がない。</span>／<span class="translation">This is a convenient location, so it’s no wonder the condominiums are pricey.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used in both the forms てもしかたがない and なくてもしかたがない. Means that a situation is unfortunate or unsatisfactory, but there is no other choice but to accept it. The cause or reason that brought about the situation at hand is often stated by adding ては to the end of the preceding clause.</div></body></html>