<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>なにげない</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0698.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【なにかにつけて】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0700.xhtml">【なにしろ】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x64219">【なにげない】</h1><h4 class="info">［なにげないN］</h4><h4 class="info">［なにげなくV］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>何気</rb><rt>なに げ</rt></ruby>ないその<ruby><rb>一言</rb><rt>ひと こと</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>心</rb><rt>こころ</rt></ruby>をひどく<ruby><rb>傷</rb><rt>きず</rt></ruby>つけた。</span>／<span class="translation">That offhand comment wounded me deeply.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>内心</rb><rt>ない しん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>動揺</rb><rt>どう よう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>隠</rb><rt>かく</rt></ruby>して<ruby><rb>何気</rb><rt>なに げ</rt></ruby>ない<ruby><rb>風</rb><rt>ふう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>装</rb><rt>よそお</rt></ruby>っている。</span>／<span class="translation">He assumes an air of indifference while hiding his inner turmoil.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>特</rb><rt>とく</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>発言</rb><rt>はつ げん</rt></ruby>もせずに<ruby><rb>我々</rb><rt>われ われ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>意見</rb><rt>い けん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>賛同</rb><rt>さん どう</rt></ruby>しているように<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>えるが、<ruby><rb>実</rb><rt>じつ</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>何気</rb><rt>なに げ</rt></ruby>ない<ruby><rb>振</rb><rt>ふ</rt></ruby>りをしてこちらの<ruby><rb>出方</rb><rt>で かた</rt></ruby>をうかがっているだけなんだ。</span>／<span class="translation">He doesn’t voice any particular opinion and seems to support our views, but I know he’s just pretending to be unconcerned as he watches our every move.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>何気</rb><rt>なに げ</rt></ruby>ない<ruby><rb>顔</rb><rt>かお</rt></ruby>つきで、みんながびっくりするような<ruby><rb>発言</rb><rt>はつ げん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>始</rb><rt>はじ</rt></ruby>めた。</span>／<span class="translation">With a nonchalant expression on her face, she began to make a statement that surprised everyone.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>なにげなく<ruby><rb>窓</rb><rt>まど</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>外</rb><rt>そと</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>ると、<ruby><rb>空</rb><rt>そら</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>きな<ruby><rb>虹</rb><rt>にじ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>架</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>かっていた。</span>／<span class="translation">When I casually glanced out of the window, I saw a big rainbow stretched across the sky.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span>なにげなく<ruby><rb>心</rb><rt>こころ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>浮</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>かんだ<ruby><rb>風景</rb><rt>ふう けい</rt></ruby>をキャンバスに<ruby><rb>描</rb><rt>えが</rt></ruby>いてみた。</span>／<span class="translation">I painted on the canvas a picture of a scene that happened to come to mind.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（7）</span><ruby><rb>何気</rb><rt>なに げ</rt></ruby>なく<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>った<ruby><rb>言葉</rb><rt>こと ば</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>をひどく<ruby><rb>傷</rb><rt>きず</rt></ruby>つけてしまった。</span>／<span class="translation">My casual remark hurt him deeply.</span></div><div class="explanation">Describes a way of behaving without careful thought or deliberate intention. Depending on the context, it can mean “without thinking carefully,” “unconsciously,” or “casually.” When this expression is used adverbially, it may take the form なにげなしに, as well as なにげなく.</div></body></html>