<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>かもしれない</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0146.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【がはやいか】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0148.xhtml">【かもわからない】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x12149">【かもしれない】</h1><h4 class="info">［N／Na／A／V　かもしれない］</h4><div class="explanation">In spoken language, the form かもわからない can also be used. In informal conversation, かもね and かもよ may be used. かもしれぬ and かもしれず are formal expressions used in written language.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x12163"><span class="number">1. </span>...かもしれない</h2><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><span class="number">A:</span>あの<ruby><rb>偉</rb><rt>えら</rt></ruby>そうにしている<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>、ひょっとしてここの<ruby><rb>社長</rb><rt>しゃ ちょう</rt></ruby>かもしれないね。</span>／<span class="translation">That person acting so high and mighty might just be the president of this company.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>そうかもね。</span>／<span class="translation">That might be.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>ここよりもあっちの<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>ほう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>静</rb><rt>しず</rt></ruby>かかもしれない。<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ってみようか。</span>／<span class="translation">It might be quieter over there than it is here. Shall we go?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>雨</rb><rt>あめ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>降</rb><rt>ふ</rt></ruby>るかもしれないから、かさを<ruby><rb>持</rb><rt>も</rt></ruby>っていったほうがいいよ。</span>／<span class="translation">It might rain today, so you’d better take your umbrella.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>来週</rb><rt>らい しゅう</rt></ruby>のパーティー、<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>くの？</span>／<span class="translation">Are you going to the party next week?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>まだ<ruby><rb>決</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>めてないんだ。<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>くかもしれないし、<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>かないかもしれない。</span>／<span class="translation">I haven’t decided yet. I may go, or I may not go.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>ノックをしても<ruby><rb>返事</rb><rt>へん じ</rt></ruby>がない。<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>はもう<ruby><rb>寝</rb><rt>ね</rt></ruby>てしまったのかもしれない。</span>／<span class="translation">There was no response when I knocked on the door. He might have gone to sleep already.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>交渉</rb><rt>こう しょう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>相手</rb><rt>あい て</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>依然</rb><rt>い ぜん</rt></ruby>として<ruby><rb>強気</rb><rt>つよ き</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>姿勢</rb><rt>し せい</rt></ruby>をくずさないということは、もしかすると<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なに</rt></ruby>か<ruby><rb>強力</rb><rt>きょう りょく</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>材料</rb><rt>ざい りょう</rt></ruby>をもっているのかもしれない。</span>／<span class="translation">The fact that the other party continues to maintain a hard-line stance in negotiations may be because they have something very powerful to back their position....</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（7）</span><ruby><rb>見合</rb><rt>み あ</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>ばなし</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>壊</rb><rt>こわ</rt></ruby>れて、さぞがっかりしているだろうと<ruby><rb>心配</rb><rt>しん ぱい</rt></ruby>していたが、それほど<ruby><rb>気</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>にしている<ruby><rb>様子</rb><rt>よう す</rt></ruby>もない。<ruby><rb>当</rb><rt>とう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>本人</rb><rt>ほん にん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>案外</rb><rt>あん がい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>平気</rb><rt>へい き</rt></ruby>なのかもしれない。</span>／<span class="translation">I was worried about her being disappointed over the breakdown of the marriage negotiations, but she didn’t seem to mind it that much. She might be unexpectedly unconcerned about it.  </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（8）</span>ちょっと<ruby><rb>待</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>って。<ruby><rb>今山田</rb><rt>いま やま だ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>君</rb><rt>くん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ったそのアイデア、ちょっとおもしろいかもしれないよ。</span>／<span class="translation">Wait a second, the idea that Yamada-kun just mentioned could be interesting.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses a supposition on the part of the speaker at the time of utterance. Means there is a possibility of something being the case. Compared to にちがいない and だろう, the degree of probability indicated by かもしれない is low, and there is a possibility it won’t happen. Sometimes used in the form のかもしれない, which consists of  かもしれない combined with のだ.</div><div class="explanation">As in (8), かもしれない may be used when the speaker wants to avoid an absolute declaration and soften <span class="noSeparate">his/her</span> manner of expression. It may also be used by the speaker to preface an assertion, in expressions like 御存知かもしれませんが or 私が間違っているかもしれませんが.</div><div class="explanation">In spoken language, かもしれない is used. In written language—including narrative passages in novels, in which different perspectives may be adopted freely—かもしれなかった can be used, as seen in the following example.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>このままでは、達彦自身の会社も危なくなるかもしれなかった。／At this rate, there was a possibility that Tatsuhiko’s own company would be in danger.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x12276"><span class="number">2. </span>たしかに...かもしれない</h2><h3 class="subsubtitle" id="idparagraphx1x12279"><span class="number"></span>なるほど...かもしれない</h3><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><span class="number">A:</span>この<ruby><rb>計画</rb><rt>けい かく</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>危険</rb><rt>き けん</rt></ruby>すぎますよ。</span>／<span class="translation">This plan is too risky.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span><ruby><rb>確</rb><rt>たし</rt></ruby>かに、<ruby><rb>危険</rb><rt>き けん</rt></ruby>かもしれない。しかし、やってみるだけの<ruby><rb>価値</rb><rt>か ち</rt></ruby>はあると<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>う。</span>／<span class="translation">Certainly, it may be risky. However, it’s worth giving it a try.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>時代</rb><rt>じ だい</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>小</rb><rt>ちい</rt></ruby>さいころから<ruby><rb>受験</rb><rt>じゅ けん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>勉強</rb><rt>べん きょう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>始</rb><rt>はじ</rt></ruby>めなければ、いい<ruby><rb>大学</rb><rt>だい がく</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>れないんですよ。</span>／<span class="translation">In this day and age, it’s impossible to get into a good university unless you start preparing for the entrance exams when you’re very young.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>なるほど<ruby><rb>君</rb><rt>きみ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>うとおりかもしれない。でも、いい<ruby><rb>大学</rb><rt>だい がく</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>はい</rt></ruby>れなくったって、いいじゃないか。</span>／<span class="translation">I see. That may well be the case, but would it really matter if we didn’t get into a good university?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>女性</rb><rt>じょ せい</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>強</rb><rt>つよ</rt></ruby>くなったといわれている。<ruby><rb>確</rb><rt>たし</rt></ruby>かに、<ruby><rb>昔</rb><rt>むかし</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>比</rb><rt>くら</rt></ruby>べれば<ruby><rb>女性</rb><rt>じょ せい</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>自由</rb><rt>じ ゆう</rt></ruby>になったかもしれない。しかし、<ruby><rb>就職</rb><rt>しゅう しょく</rt></ruby>ひとつを<ruby><rb>例</rb><rt>れい</rt></ruby>にとっても、<ruby><rb>真</rb><rt>しん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>男女</rb><rt>だん じょ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>平等</rb><rt>びょう どう</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>うにはほど<ruby><rb>遠</rb><rt>とお</rt></ruby>いのが<ruby><rb>日本</rb><rt>に ほん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>現状</rb><rt>げん じょう</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">It is said that women have gotten stronger. It may be true that women have more freedom compared with the olden days, but if you look at employment as an example, the present situation in Japan is a long way from true gender equality.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used by the speaker to state a differing opinion, after having first acknowledged the possibility that something the other person has said, or a general opinion, may be true.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x12334"><span class="number">3. </span>...ば／...たら　...かもしれない</h2><h3 class="subsubtitle" id="idsubsubtitlex1x12337"><span class="number">a. </span>...ば／...たら　V-るかもしれない</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>ここで<ruby><rb>代打</rb><rt>だい だ</rt></ruby>がホームランでも<ruby><rb>打</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>てば、<ruby><rb>形勢</rb><rt>けい せい</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>逆転</rb><rt>ぎゃく てん</rt></ruby>するかもしれない。</span>／<span class="translation">If the pinch hitter hits a home run here, the momentum of the game could be reversed.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>もう<ruby><rb>少</rb><rt>すこ</rt></ruby>しがんばれば、<ruby><rb>志望校</rb><rt>し ぼう こう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>合格</rb><rt>ごう かく</rt></ruby>できるかもしれない。</span>／<span class="translation">If I try a little harder, I may be able to pass the exam for the college I want to get into.</span></div><div class="explanation">Indicates the speaker’s conjecture regarding what might happen next, based on the assumption of a certain condition.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x12362"><span class="number">b. </span>...ば／...たら　V-たかもしれない</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>あの<ruby><rb>時</rb><rt>とき</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>引</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>留</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>めていたら、<ruby><rb>僕</rb><rt>ぼく</rt></ruby>たちは<ruby><rb>別</rb><rt>わか</rt></ruby>れずに<ruby><rb>済</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>んだかもしれない。</span>／<span class="translation">If I had stopped her from leaving then, we might not have broken up.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>もう<ruby><rb>少</rb><rt>すこ</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>早</rb><rt>はや</rt></ruby>く<ruby><rb>手術</rb><rt>しゅ じゅつ</rt></ruby>をしていれば、あるいは<ruby><rb>助</rb><rt>たす</rt></ruby>かったかもしれない。</span>／<span class="translation">Had he been operated on sooner, he might have been saved.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>もし、あの<ruby><rb>時</rb><rt>とき</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>救急車</rb><rt>きゅう きゅう しゃ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>到着</rb><rt>とう ちゃく</rt></ruby>があと5<ruby><rb>分</rb><rt>ふん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>遅</rb><rt>おそ</rt></ruby>かったら、<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>こうして<ruby><rb>生</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>きていなかったかもしれない。</span>／<span class="translation">If the ambulance had arrived five minutes later than it did at that time, I might not be here alive.</span></div><div class="explanation">This pattern is used to talk about something that has already happened and to express that, if the conditions had been different, the result could have been different. Used to express the speaker’s regret, or a sense of relief that a negative outcome was avoided.</div></body></html>