<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>どんな</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0642.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【とんでもない】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0644.xhtml">【どんなに】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x59741">【どんな】</h1><h4 class="info">［どんなN+助詞+も］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>母</rb><rt>はは</rt></ruby>はどんなことでもやさしく<ruby><rb>聞</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>いてくれる。</span>／<span class="translation">My mother kindly listens to whatever I have to say.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>どんな<ruby><rb>状況</rb><rt>じょう きょう</rt></ruby>においても<ruby><rb>対応</rb><rt>たい おう</rt></ruby>できる<ruby><rb>準備</rb><rt>じゅん び</rt></ruby>ができている。</span>／<span class="translation">I am ready to cope with any situation. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>どんな<ruby><rb>人間</rb><rt>にん げん</rt></ruby>にも<ruby><rb>幸福</rb><rt>こう ふく</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>生</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>きて<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>く<ruby><rb>権利</rb><rt>けん り</rt></ruby>がある。</span>／<span class="translation">Every human being has the right to lead a happy life. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>はどんな<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>からも<ruby><rb>好</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>かれる<ruby><rb>女性</rb><rt>じょ せい</rt></ruby>です。</span>／<span class="translation">She is a woman who is liked by everyone.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>教師</rb><rt>きょう し</rt></ruby>はどんな<ruby><rb>学生</rb><rt>がく せい</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>対</rb><rt>たい</rt></ruby>してもわけへだてなく<ruby><rb>付</rb><rt>つ</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>合</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>う<ruby><rb>必要</rb><rt>ひつ よう</rt></ruby>がある。</span>／<span class="translation">Teachers need to be able to deal impartially with any kind of student.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>はどんなことにも<ruby><rb>興味</rb><rt>きょう み</rt></ruby>をもつ<ruby><rb>人間</rb><rt>にん げん</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">He is a person who is interested in anything and everything.</span></div><div class="explanation">The pattern どんなN+助詞+も expresses that the situation or state of affairs described after this clause holds true in all cases, regardless of the particular characteristics of the thing or person referred to by N.</div></body></html>