<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>のだ</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0857.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【のきわみ】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0859.xhtml">【のだった】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x76632">【のだ】</h1><h4 class="info">［N／Na　なのだ］</h4><h4 class="info">［A／V　のだ］</h4><div class="explanation">Usually used in written Japanese. In spoken Japanese, it often becomes んだ. The polite form of this expression is のです, which is also used in spoken Japanese. In casual spoken Japanese, だ may be dropped so the sentence ends with の (e.g. どうしたの？). In formal written Japanese, のである may be used.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x76651"><span class="number">1. </span>...のだ〈explanation〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>道路</rb><rt>どう ろ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>渋滞</rb><rt>じゅう たい</rt></ruby>している。きっとこの<ruby><rb>先</rb><rt>さき</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>工事</rb><rt>こう じ</rt></ruby>をしているのだ。</span>／<span class="translation">The road is jammed with traffic. There must be some construction going on ahead. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>をすっかり<ruby><rb>怒</rb><rt>おこ</rt></ruby>らせてしまった。よほど<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ったことが<ruby><rb>気</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>にさわったのだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">I made him totally angry. What I said must have really offended him.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>泰子</rb><rt>やす こ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>のことが<ruby><rb>嫌</rb><rt>きら</rt></ruby>いなのだ。だって、このところ<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>避</rb><rt>さ</rt></ruby>けようとしているもの。</span>／<span class="translation">I’m sure Yasuko doesn’t like me, because she’s trying to avoid me these days.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to explain the cause or reason for what was stated in the preceding sentence, for the speaker’s immediate circumstances, etc. </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x76685"><span class="number">2. </span>...のだ〈claim〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>やっぱりこれでよかったのだ。</span>／<span class="translation">This was the right decision after all.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>誰</rb><rt>だれ</rt></ruby>がなんと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>おうと<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>意見</rb><rt>い けん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>間違</rb><rt>ま ちが</rt></ruby>っていないのだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Whatever anyone else may say, my opinion is ultimately right. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>誰</rb><rt>だれ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>反対</rb><rt>はん たい</rt></ruby>しても<ruby><rb>僕</rb><rt>ぼく</rt></ruby>はやるのだ。</span>／<span class="translation">I’m going to do it, no matter who is against it.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used by the speaker to make a strong assertion to convince <span class="noSeparate">him/her</span>self of something or to show <span class="noSeparate">his/her</span> own determination.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x76716"><span class="number">3. </span><ruby><rb>疑</rb><rt>ぎ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>問</rb><rt>もん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>詞</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>...のだ</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>避</rb><rt>さ</rt></ruby>けようとしている。いったい<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なに</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>気</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>らないのだ。</span>／<span class="translation">He’s trying to avoid me. What in heaven’s name is it about me that he doesn’t like?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>こんな<ruby><rb>馬鹿</rb><rt>ば か</rt></ruby>げたことを<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>だ</rt></ruby>したのはだれなのだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Whoever started saying such a stupid thing?</span></div><div class="explanation">Placed after a clause containing a question word and used by the speaker to ask <span class="noSeparate">him/her</span>self or the addressee for some kind of explanation.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x76741"><span class="number">4. </span>つまり...のだ</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>防災</rb><rt>ぼうさい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>設備</rb><rt>せつ び</rt></ruby>さえ<ruby><rb>完備</rb><rt>かん び</rt></ruby>していればこのようなことにならなかった。つまりこの<ruby><rb>災害</rb><rt>さい がい</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>天災</rb><rt>てん さい</rt></ruby>ではなく<ruby><rb>人災</rb><rt>じん さい</rt></ruby>だったのだ。</span>／<span class="translation">If only disaster prevention equipment had been fully supplied, this wouldn’t have happened. In other words, this was not a natural disaster but a man-made one.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>いたいのは、<ruby><rb>緊急</rb><rt>きん きゅう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>対策</rb><rt>たい さく</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>打</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>たなければならないということなのだ。</span>／<span class="translation">What I want to say is that we must take emergency measures to deal with this.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>会社</rb><rt>かい しゃ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>経営</rb><rt>けい えい</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>最悪</rb><rt>さい あく</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>事態</rb><rt>じ たい</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>迎</rb><rt>むか</rt></ruby>えている。<ruby><rb>要</rb><rt>よう</rt></ruby>するに、<ruby><rb>人員</rb><rt>じんいん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>削減</rb><rt>さくげん</rt></ruby>はもはや<ruby><rb>避</rb><rt>さ</rt></ruby>けられないことなのだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Company operations are facing the worst situation possible. In short, personnel cuts are now virtually unavoidable.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used after expressions like つまり (in other words), 私が言いたいのは (what I want to say is), and 要するに (in short). Used to paraphrase what was stated previously.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x76772"><span class="number">5. </span>だから...のだ</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>コンセントが<ruby><rb>抜</rb><rt>ぬ</rt></ruby>けている。だからスイッチを<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>れてもつかなかったのだ。</span>／<span class="translation">It wasn’t plugged in. That’s why it didn’t start when we switched it on.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>エンジンオイルが<ruby><rb>漏</rb><rt>も</rt></ruby>れている。だから<ruby><rb>変</rb><rt>へん</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>臭</rb><rt>にお</rt></ruby>いがしたのだ。</span>／<span class="translation">The engine oil is leaking. That’s why we smelled something strange.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>産業</rb><rt>さん ぎょう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>廃棄物</rb><rt>はい き ぶつ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>不法</rb><rt>ふ ほう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>投棄</rb><rt>とう き</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>後</rb><rt>あと</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>立</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>たない。そのために<ruby><rb>我々</rb><rt>われ われ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>生活</rb><rt>せい かつ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>脅</rb><rt>おびや</rt></ruby>かされているのだ。</span>／<span class="translation">There is no end to the illegal dumping of industrial waste. That is why our lives are threatened.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used after expressions such as だから (that’s why) and そのために (for that reason). Means that what is stated in the sentence with のだ is a consequence of what was stated in the preceding sentence.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x76803"><span class="number">6. </span>...のだから</h2><h4 class="info">［N／Na　なのだから］</h4><h4 class="info">［A／V　のだから］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>まだ<ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>なのだから、わからなくても<ruby><rb>仕方</rb><rt>し かた</rt></ruby>がないでしょう。</span>／<span class="translation">Because he’s still a child, it can’t be helped if he doesn’t understand.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>でもできたのだから、あなたにできないはずがない。</span>／<span class="translation">Since even I was able to do it, there’s no reason you shouldn’t be able to.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>あした<ruby><rb>出発</rb><rt>しゅっ ぱつ</rt></ruby>するのだから、<ruby><rb>今日</rb><rt>きょう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>中</rb><rt>じゅう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>準備</rb><rt>じゅん び</rt></ruby>をしておいた<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>ほう</rt></ruby>がいい。</span>／<span class="translation">Since we’re leaving tomorrow, we should get ready today.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>冬</rb><rt>ふゆ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>山</rb><rt>やま</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>危険</rb><rt>き けん</rt></ruby>なのだから、くれぐれも<ruby><rb>慎重</rb><rt>しん ちょう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>行動</rb><rt>こう どう</rt></ruby>してくださいね。</span>／<span class="translation">Mountains in the winter are dangerous, so please proceed with the greatest caution. </span></div><div class="explanation">Placed after a clause. Indicates that the speaker acknowledges whatever is stated in that clause to be a fact, as well as that this fact is the cause or reason that leads to the judgment etc. stated in clause that follows. For instance, in (1), after the speaker acknowledges that “he is still a child,” <span class="noSeparate">s/he</span> makes the judgment, based on this fact, that he (the child) should not be expected to understand. In contrast, in the sentenceまだ子供だからわからないのだろう, which means “the reason he doesn’t understand is probably that he is a child,” the speaker is guessing the reason. In spoken Japanese, のだから often becomes ...んだから.</div></body></html>