<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>と1</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0512.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【てん】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0514.xhtml">【と<sub class="variation">2</sub>】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x47484">【と<sub class="variation">1</sub>】</h1><h4 class="info">［N／Na　だと］</h4><h4 class="info">［A-いと］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-ると］</h4><div class="explanation">Attaches to the dictionary form of a predicate. Although it is usually used with plain forms, in polite language it is also used in the form ですと or ますと. Expresses the relation that the second event is realized because of the condition created by the first event. </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x47506"><span class="number">1. </span>...と〈generic condition〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>あまり<ruby><rb>生活</rb><rt>せい かつ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>便利</rb><rt>べん り</rt></ruby>だと<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>不精</rb><rt>ぶ しょう</rt></ruby>になる。</span>／<span class="translation">People become lazy when lifestyles are too convenient.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>気温</rb><rt>き おん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>低</rb><rt>ひく</rt></ruby>いと<ruby><rb>桜</rb><rt>さくら</rt></ruby>はなかなか<ruby><rb>咲</rb><rt>さ</rt></ruby>かない。</span>／<span class="translation">If the temperatures are low, it takes a long time for the cherry blossoms to bloom.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>酒</rb><rt>さけ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>飲</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>むと<ruby><rb>顔</rb><rt>かお</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>赤</rb><rt>あか</rt></ruby>くなる。</span>／<span class="translation">His face turns red if he drinks alcohol.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>春</rb><rt>はる</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>ると<ruby><rb>花</rb><rt>はな</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>咲</rb><rt>さ</rt></ruby>く。</span>／<span class="translation">When spring comes, flowers bloom.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>水</rb><rt>みず</rt></ruby>は 100 <ruby><rb>度</rb><rt>ど</rt></ruby>になると<ruby><rb>沸騰</rb><rt>ふっ とう</rt></ruby>する。</span>／<span class="translation">Water boils when it reaches 100 degrees Celsius.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>気温</rb><rt>き おん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>急</rb><rt>きゅう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>下</rb><rt>さ</rt></ruby>がると<ruby><rb>霧</rb><rt>きり</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>発生</rb><rt>はっ せい</rt></ruby>する。</span>／<span class="translation">Fog forms when the temperature drops suddenly.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（7）</span>だれでも<ruby><rb>年</rb><rt>とし</rt></ruby>をとると<ruby><rb>昔</rb><rt>むかし</rt></ruby>がなつかしくなるものだ。</span>／<span class="translation">All people wax nostalgic over the past as they get older.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（8）</span><ruby><rb>生活</rb><rt>せい かつ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>安定</rb><rt>あん てい</rt></ruby>すると<ruby><rb>退屈</rb><rt>たい くつ</rt></ruby>になるし、<ruby><rb>不安定</rb><rt>ふ あん てい</rt></ruby>すぎるとストレスがたまる。</span>／<span class="translation">When life is stable, it gets boring, and if it’s too unstable, it causes stress.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（9）</span><ruby><rb>月</rb><rt>つき</rt></ruby>にかさがかかると<ruby><rb>翌日</rb><rt>よく じつ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>雨</rb><rt>あめ</rt></ruby>になる。</span>／<span class="translation">When the moon has a halo, it will rain the next day.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（10）</span><ruby><rb>来年</rb><rt>らい ねん</rt></ruby>のことを<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>うと<ruby><rb>鬼</rb><rt>おに</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>笑</rb><rt>わら</rt></ruby>う。</span>／<span class="translation">Don’t count your chickens before they’re hatched (lit. If you talk about next year, the devil will laugh).</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（11）</span><ruby><rb>夜爪</rb><rt>よる つめ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>切</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>ると<ruby><rb>親</rb><rt>おや</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>死</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>目</rb><rt>め</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>会</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>えない。</span>／<span class="translation">If you cut your nails at night, you’ll never say your last goodbyes to your parents (lit. If you cut your nails at night, you won't be able to see your parents at the time of their death).</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses a conditional relationship that applies not to a specific person or thing, but to people or things in general. Means “if X happens, then Y is inevitable.” The end of the sentence is always in dictionary form, and <i>ta-</i>forms, conjectural forms, and so on are not possible. As in (7), sometimes と is combined with ものだ, which signifies that a certain characteristic is intrinsic to the thing or situation at hand.</div><div class="explanation">Often used to express a relationship in which the event stated in the second clause occurs automatically or spontaneously after the event in the first clause. Thus, this pattern is often used to state laws of nature. Both (10) and (11) are proverbial expressions.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x47601"><span class="number">2. </span>...と〈repetition, habit〉</h2><div class="explanation">Expresses repeated habits or actions of a particular person or thing. Often accompanied by adverbs such as 必ず(invariably), いつも(always), 毎年(every year), or よく(often). Unlike the generic condition expressed in Usage 1, this usage concerns a particular subject, and either the dictionary form or <i>ta</i>-form may be used at the end of the sentence.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x47617"><span class="number">a. </span>...と...る</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>おじいさんは<ruby><rb>天気</rb><rt>てん き</rt></ruby>がいいと<ruby><rb>裏山</rb><rt>うら やま</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>散歩</rb><rt>さん ぽ</rt></ruby>にでかける。</span>／<span class="translation">Grandfather strolls in the hills behind our house whenever the weather is fine. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>兄</rb><rt>あに</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>冬</rb><rt>ふゆ</rt></ruby>になると<ruby><rb>毎年</rb><rt>まい とし</rt></ruby>スキーに<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>く。</span>／<span class="translation">My older brother goes skiing every year when winter comes.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>隣</rb><rt>となり</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>犬</rb><rt>いぬ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>顔</rb><rt>かお</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>るといつもほえる。</span>／<span class="translation">The dog next door barks every time she sees my face.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>面白</rb><rt>おも しろ</rt></ruby>いコマーシャルを<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>るとすぐその<ruby><rb>製品</rb><rt>せい ひん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>いたくなるくせがある。</span>／<span class="translation">Whenever I see an interesting commercial, I tend to want to buy the product right away.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>お<ruby><rb>酒</rb><rt>さけ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>飲</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>むといつも<ruby><rb>頭</rb><rt>あたま</rt></ruby>がいたくなる。</span>／<span class="translation">I always get a headache when I drink alcohol.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span>キーボードを2<ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby>たたくと<ruby><rb>肩</rb><rt>かた</rt></ruby>がこる。</span>／<span class="translation">I get stiff shoulders whenever I type on a keyboard for two hours.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（7）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>はストレスがたまるとむやみに<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べたくなるのだそうだ。</span>／<span class="translation">I heard that whenever she’s under stress, she wants to eat a lot.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（8）</span><ruby><rb>僕</rb><rt>ぼく</rt></ruby>がデートに<ruby><rb>遅</rb><rt>おく</rt></ruby>れると<ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>必</rb><rt>かなら</rt></ruby>ず<ruby><rb>不機嫌</rb><rt>ふ き げん</rt></ruby>になる。</span>／<span class="translation">My girlfriend always gets upset when I’m late for a date.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（9）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>給料</rb><rt>きゅう りょう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>はい</rt></ruby>ると<ruby><rb>飲</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>みに<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>く。</span>／<span class="translation">He goes out drinking whenever he gets paid.</span></div><div class="explanation">Indicates the repetition of a present habit or action of a particular person or thing. The dictionary form of a predicate is used at the end of the sentence.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x47684"><span class="number">b. </span>...と...た（ものだ）</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>のころ<ruby><rb>天気</rb><rt>てん き</rt></ruby>がいいと、この<ruby><rb>辺</rb><rt>へん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>祖母</rb><rt>そ ぼ</rt></ruby>とよく<ruby><rb>散歩</rb><rt>さん ぽ</rt></ruby>をしたものだ。</span>／<span class="translation">When I was a child, if the weather was nice, I often used to take walks with my grandmother around here.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>日曜日</rb><rt>にち よう び</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>一家</rb><rt>いっ か</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>物</rb><rt>もの</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>ると、<ruby><rb>必</rb><rt>かなら</rt></ruby>ずデパートの<ruby><rb>食堂</rb><rt>しょく どう</rt></ruby>でお<ruby><rb>昼</rb><rt>ひる</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べた。</span>／<span class="translation">When my family went shopping together on Sundays, we always ate lunch in the department store cafeteria.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>祖母</rb><rt>そ ぼ</rt></ruby>のところに<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>くと<ruby><rb>必</rb><rt>かなら</rt></ruby>ずおこづかいをもらったものだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Whenever I went to my grandmother’s, I always got some spending money.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>学生</rb><rt>がく せい</rt></ruby>のころは、<ruby><rb>試験</rb><rt>し けん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>始</rb><rt>はじ</rt></ruby>まると<ruby><rb>胃</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>痛</rb><rt>いた</rt></ruby>くなったものだ。</span>／<span class="translation">When I was a student, as soon as exams started I would always get a stomach ache.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>北海道</rb><rt>ほっ かい どう</rt></ruby>のおじさんが<ruby><rb>遊</rb><rt>あそ</rt></ruby>びに<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>ると<ruby><rb>娘</rb><rt>むすめ</rt></ruby>たちはいつも<ruby><rb>大喜</rb><rt>おお よろこ</rt></ruby>びをした。</span>／<span class="translation">My daughters were always overjoyed whenever their uncle from Hokkaido came to visit.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span>あのころは<ruby><rb>一日</rb><rt>いち にち</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>働</rb><rt>はたら</rt></ruby>くと、<ruby><rb>一</rb><rt>いっ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>ヶ</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>月</rb><rt>げつ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>遊</rb><rt>あそ</rt></ruby>んで<ruby><rb>暮</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>らせたものだ。</span>／<span class="translation">At that time, I could goof off for a month on just one day’s work.</span></div><div class="explanation">The <i>ta-</i>form of a predicate is used at the end of the sentence to express the repetition of a past habit or action of a particular person or thing. Often accompanied by the phrase たものだ, which expresses reminiscence.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x47739"><span class="number">3. </span>...と〈yet-to-be-realized condition〉</h2><h3 class="subsubtitle" id="idsubsubtitlex1x47742"><span class="number">a. </span>...と+<ruby><rb>未</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>実</rb><rt>じつ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>現</rb><rt>げん</rt></ruby>のことがら</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>ここをまっすぐ<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>くと<ruby><rb>右手</rb><rt>みぎ て</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>きな<ruby><rb>建物</rb><rt>たて もの</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>えます。</span>／<span class="translation">If you go straight here, you’ll see a large building on your right.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>このボタンを<ruby><rb>押</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>すとドアは<ruby><rb>開</rb><rt>ひら</rt></ruby>きます。</span>／<span class="translation">If you push this button, the door will open.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>この<ruby><rb>小説</rb><rt>しょう せつ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>読</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>むと<ruby><rb>世界観</rb><rt>せ かい かん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>変</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>わるかもしれません。</span>／<span class="translation">Your view of the world may change if you read this novel.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>雨天</rb><rt>う てん</rt></ruby>だと<ruby><rb>明日</rb><rt>あした</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>試合</rb><rt>し あい</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>中止</rb><rt>ちゅう し</rt></ruby>になります。</span>／<span class="translation">If it rains, then tomorrow’s match will be canceled.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>これを<ruby><rb>全部</rb><rt>ぜん ぶ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>計算</rb><rt>けい さん</rt></ruby>すると、<ruby><rb>総費用</rb><rt>そう ひ よう</rt></ruby>はだいたい100<ruby><rb>万円</rb><rt>まん えん</rt></ruby>になります。</span>／<span class="translation">If you calculate all this, the total cost is about a million yen.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>動</rb><rt>うご</rt></ruby>くと<ruby><rb>撃</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>つぞ。</span>／<span class="translation">Move and I’ll shoot!</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（7）</span>そんなに<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べると<ruby><rb>太</rb><rt>ふと</rt></ruby>るよ。</span>／<span class="translation">You’ll gain weight if you eat that much.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（8）</span><ruby><rb>真面目</rb><rt>ま じ め</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>勉強</rb><rt>べん きょう</rt></ruby>しないと<ruby><rb>卒業</rb><rt>そつ ぎょう</rt></ruby>できないよ。</span>／<span class="translation">If you don’t study hard, you won’t graduate, you know.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（9）</span><ruby><rb>生活</rb><rt>せい かつ</rt></ruby>がこんなに<ruby><rb>不安定</rb><rt>ふ あん てい</rt></ruby>だと<ruby><rb>落</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>ち<ruby><rb>着</rb><rt>つ</rt></ruby>いて<ruby><rb>研究</rb><rt>けん きゅう</rt></ruby>ができない。</span>／<span class="translation">When my livelihood is this uncertain, I can’t concentrate on my research.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（10）</span>こんなにおいしいといくらでも<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べてしまいそうだ。</span>／<span class="translation">When it’s this delicious, I could eat as much as there is.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to say that “if/when X occurs, then Y will occur,” with respect to a particular person or thing. The Y clause always expresses an unrealized situation, but the X clause may express either an unrealized situation or one that has already come about.</div><div class="explanation">(1)-(6) are cases in which X has not been realized, and (7)-(10) are cases in which X has already been realized. (6) is a threat directed at an addressee who is on the verge of moving. In this situation it would also be possible to say 動いたら撃つぞ (If you move, then I’ll shoot), but the use of と implies that both actions will occur virtually simultaneously, giving the threat more impact than when it is expressed with the たら form. (7) and (8) are ways to warn or admonish someone who is overeating and someone who is lax about studying, respectively.</div><div class="explanation">The Y clause may be followed by expressions to emphasize a fact, or expressions of conjecture such as だろう or かもしれない. However, expressions meant to exert an effect on the other party, including commands, requests, and invitations, cannot be used. V-よう intentional forms cannot be used either.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>雨天だと明日の試合は中止しよう。／When it’s rainy, let’s cancel tomorrow’s match.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>雨天なら明日の試合は中止しよう。／If it rains, let’s cancel tomorrow’s match.</div><div class="explanation">Since と conveys a strong implication that a condition has already been realized or is very likely to be realized in the future, there is a tendency to avoid combining it with the word もし, which signifies a hypothetical situation.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>もし雨天だと試合は中止になります。／Supposing when it rains, the match will be canceled.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>もし雨天なら試合は中止になります。／If it rains, the match will be canceled.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x47880"><span class="number">b. </span>...と+<ruby><rb>疑</rb><rt>ぎ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>問</rb><rt>もん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>詞</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>...か</h3><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><span class="number">A:</span>お<ruby><rb>酒</rb><rt>さけ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>飲</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>むとどうなりますか。</span>／<span class="translation">What happens if you drink alcohol?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span><ruby><rb>顔</rb><rt>かお</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>赤</rb><rt>あか</rt></ruby>くなります。</span>／<span class="translation">My face turns red.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><span class="number">A:</span>51 を3で<ruby><rb>割</rb><rt>わ</rt></ruby>るといくつになりますか。</span>／<span class="translation">What do you get if you divide 51 by 3?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>17 になります。</span>／<span class="translation">It’s 17.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><span class="number">A:</span>この<ruby><rb>道</rb><rt>みち</rt></ruby>をまっすぐ<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>くと、どこに<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>ますか。</span>／<span class="translation">Where does this road lead to, if we follow it straight ahead?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span><ruby><rb>国道</rb><rt>こく どう</rt></ruby>1<ruby><rb>号線</rb><rt>ごう せん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>ます。</span>／<span class="translation">It leads to National Highway No. 1.</span></div><div class="explanation">This is like the form するとどうなるか (if such-and-such is done, what is the outcome?). と is followed by an interrogative clause such as どうなるか or 何があるか, which contains a question word and a verb that expresses some kind of unintentional action, such as change or existence. Expressions denoting actions that are consciously controllable, such as どうするか, cannot be used unless they indicate a habitual behavior or characteristic. </div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>水は 100 度になるとどうしますか。／What will you do when water reaches a temperature of 100 degrees Celsius?</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>水は 100 度になるとどうなりますか。／What happens when water reaches a temperature of 100 degrees Celsius?</div><div class="explanation">The particle と is similar to the pattern するとどうなるか in that the focus of the question is usually on the second half of the sentence. It is difficult to use in patterns like どうするとそうなるか, where the focus of the question is on the first half of the sentence. In these cases, it is more natural to use ば or たら rather than と.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>どうするとドアは開きますか。／What do you do then the door opens?</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>どう｛すれば／したら｝ドアは開きますか。／What should be done so that the door opens?</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x47996"><span class="number">4. </span>...と...た〈already-realized condition〉</h2><div class="explanation">The situations specified before and after と are previously-realized conditions. Typically, the <i>ta</i>-form appears in sentence-final position, but in novels and other literary works, the dictionary form is sometimes used to express the historical present. In almost all cases, a verb is used both before and after this expression. Often used in stories and novels. In conversation, たら is more commonly used. </div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x48015"><span class="number">a. </span>...と...た〈trigger〉</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>教</rb><rt>おし</rt></ruby>えられた<ruby><rb>通</rb><rt>とお</rt></ruby>りまっすぐ<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>くと、つきあたりに<ruby><rb>郵便局</rb><rt>ゆう びん きょく</rt></ruby>があった。</span>／<span class="translation">When I went straight down the road I had been shown, there was a post office at the end.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>駅</rb><rt>えき</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>着</rb><rt>つ</rt></ruby>くと、<ruby><rb>友達</rb><rt>とも だち</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>迎</rb><rt>むか</rt></ruby>えに<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>ていた。</span>／<span class="translation">When I arrived at the station, my friend was already there to meet me.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>トンネルを<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>ると、そこは<ruby><rb>銀世界</rb><rt>ぎん せ かい</rt></ruby>だった。</span>／<span class="translation">Passing through a tunnel brought us into a winter wonderland.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>お<ruby><rb>風呂</rb><rt>ふ ろ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>はい</rt></ruby>っていると、<ruby><rb>電話</rb><rt>でん わ</rt></ruby>がかかってきた。</span>／<span class="translation">It was while I was sitting in the bath that the telephone rang.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>街</rb><rt>まち</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>歩</rb><rt>ある</rt></ruby>いていると、<ruby><rb>見知</rb><rt>み し</rt></ruby>らぬ<ruby><rb>男</rb><rt>おとこ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>声</rb><rt>こえ</rt></ruby>をかけてきた。</span>／<span class="translation">When she was walking about the town, a strange man called to her.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>夜</rb><rt>よる</rt></ruby>になると<ruby><rb>急</rb><rt>きゅう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>冷</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby>え<ruby><rb>込</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>んできた。</span>／<span class="translation">When evening came, it suddenly turned cold.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（7）</span><ruby><rb>午後</rb><rt>ご ご</rt></ruby>になるとだいぶ<ruby><rb>暖</rb><rt>あたた</rt></ruby>かくなった。</span>／<span class="translation">When afternoon came, it became much warmer.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（8）</span>ベルを<ruby><rb>鳴</rb><rt>な</rt></ruby>らすと、<ruby><rb>女</rb><rt>おんな</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>子</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>て<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>た。</span>／<span class="translation">When I rang the bell, a young girl came out.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（9）</span><ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>をやめるとたちまちお<ruby><rb>金</rb><rt>かね</rt></ruby>がなくなった。</span>／<span class="translation">When I quit my job, my money ran out in no time.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses a relationship between two situations, such as when the occurrence of the first situation makes the speaker aware of the second, or the first situation is a trigger that brings about the second. (1), (2), and (3) show that as soon as the first action is carried out, the speaker “discovers” the second situation. (4) and (5) are scenarios in which a new situation arises while the first action is taking place. In (6) and (7), the first half of the sentence expresses a time-related condition that leads to the realization of the second situation. (8) and (9) express a relation in which the first action triggers the occurrence of the second one.</div><div class="explanation">In all cases, the second situation must be part of the same overall situation as the first one, and it must also be something the speaker can observe from the outside. The following example describes an internal physical sensation of the speaker. Here the particle と is not possible, and たら must be used instead.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>昨夜この薬を飲むと、よく効いた。／On taking this medicine last night, it worked really well.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>昨夜この薬を飲んだら、よく効いた。／When I took this medicine last night, it worked really well.</div><div class="explanation">In almost all cases, a verb is used in both clauses. However, when this pattern is used to express the discovery of a situation, a predicate noun or adjective may conclude the second sentence, as shown in (3) above and the example below.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>外に出ると、予想以上に寒かった。／On going outside, I found it much colder than I had imagined.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x48132"><span class="number">b. </span>...と...た〈successive events〉</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>男</rb><rt>おとこ</rt></ruby>はめざまし<ruby><rb>時計</rb><rt>ど けい</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>止</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>めると、またベッドへ<ruby><rb>戻</rb><rt>もど</rt></ruby>った。</span>／<span class="translation">After shutting off his alarm clock, the man climbed back into bed.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>わたしは、<ruby><rb>東京駅</rb><rt>とう きょう えき</rt></ruby>へ<ruby><rb>着</rb><rt>つ</rt></ruby>くとその<ruby><rb>足</rb><rt>あし</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>会社</rb><rt>かい しゃ</rt></ruby>へ<ruby><rb>向</rb><rt>む</rt></ruby>かった。</span>／<span class="translation">After reaching Tokyo Station, I continued on to the office.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>母</rb><rt>はは</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>受話機</rb><rt>じゅ わ き</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>置</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>くと、ためいきをついた。</span>／<span class="translation">After putting down the receiver, Mother let out a sigh.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses a situation in which the same person performs two actions in succession, the first one leading to the second. Both actions are intentional. Although the <i>ta</i>-form is usually used at the end of the sentence, in stage directions for things like screenplays the dictionary form may be used, as below.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>《シナリオ》良雄は、手をふくと、ギターを手に取る。／《script》Yoshio wipes his hands, then picks up the guitar.</div><div class="explanation">The &lt;successive events&gt; usage of と is often found in novels or stories. With this usage, たら is unnatural, and it is almost never possible to use たら instead of と. This と can be replaced by the <i>te</i>-form of the verb, but it is not always possible to replace the <i>te</i>-form of the verb with と. For example, the <i>te</i>-form can be used to link three or more successive actions, but と cannot be used to do so.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>父は家に帰ると、ご飯を食べると、すぐ布団に入った。／When my father came home, when he ate dinner, he soon got into bed (lit. his <i>futon</i>).</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>父は家に帰って、ご飯を食べて、すぐ布団に入った。／My father came home, ate dinner, and soon got into bed.</div><div class="explanation">While the <i>te</i>-form expresses successive actions that are part of the same situation, と divides one situation into two parts. It is used to depict, from an external point of view, the change that arises as the first situation switches into the second one.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x48228"><span class="number">5. </span>...とすぐ</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>はうちへ<ruby><rb>帰</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>るとすぐテレビのスイッチを<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>れる。</span>／<span class="translation">As soon as he gets home, he turns on the TV.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>放送局</rb><rt>ほう そう きょく</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>駅</rb><rt>えき</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>降</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>りて<ruby><rb>右</rb><rt>みぎ</rt></ruby>へ<ruby><rb>曲</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>がるとすぐです。</span>／<span class="translation">The broadcasting station is just after you take the first right from the station.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>うちへ<ruby><rb>帰</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>るとすぐテレビのスイッチを<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>れた。</span>／<span class="translation">I turned on the TV as soon as I got home.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>らは<ruby><rb>土地</rb><rt>と ち</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>開発</rb><rt>かい はつ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>許可</rb><rt>きょ か</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>降</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>りるとすぐ<ruby><rb>工事</rb><rt>こう じ</rt></ruby>にとりかかった。</span>／<span class="translation">As soon as they got the land development permit, they started construction.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>大学</rb><rt>だい がく</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>卒業</rb><rt>そつ ぎょう</rt></ruby>するとすぐ<ruby><rb>結婚</rb><rt>けっ こん</rt></ruby>した。</span>／<span class="translation">She got married right after she graduated from college.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span>スポーツをやめるとすぐ<ruby><rb>太</rb><rt>ふと</rt></ruby>り<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>だ</rt></ruby>した。</span>／<span class="translation">As soon as he stopped playing sports, he started to put on weight.</span></div><div class="explanation">This is a combination of the conditional expression と and the adverb すぐ. It means that a first event is followed immediately by the occurrence of a second.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x48280"><span class="number">6. </span>...と〈introductory utterance〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>正直</rb><rt>しょう じき</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>うと、そのことについてはあまりよく<ruby><rb>分</rb><rt>わ</rt></ruby>からないのです。</span>／<span class="translation">To be honest, I really don’t know very much about that.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>母</rb><rt>はは</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>わせると、<ruby><rb>最近</rb><rt>さい きん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>若者</rb><rt>わか もの</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>行儀</rb><rt>ぎょう ぎ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>悪</rb><rt>わる</rt></ruby>くなっているようだ。</span>／<span class="translation">If you ask my mother, apparently young people these days have worse manners. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>本当</rb><rt>ほん  とう</rt></ruby>のことを<ruby><rb>申</rb><rt>もう</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>げますと、<ruby><rb>手術</rb><rt>しゅ じゅつ</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>助</rb><rt>たす</rt></ruby>かる<ruby><rb>見込</rb><rt>み こ</rt></ruby>みは 50 パーセント<ruby><rb>以下</rb><rt>い か</rt></ruby>ではないかと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>います。</span>／<span class="translation">If I may speak frankly, I think the chances of success for this operation may be less than fifty percent.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>実用的</rb><rt>じつ よう てき</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>点</rb><rt>てん</rt></ruby>からみると、あまり<ruby><rb>使</rb><rt>つか</rt></ruby>いやすい<ruby><rb>部屋</rb><rt>へ や</rt></ruby>ではない。</span>／<span class="translation">Looking at it from the point of view of practicality, it’s not a very easy-to-use room.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>となって<ruby><rb>考</rb><rt>かんが</rt></ruby>えてみると、<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>うことももっともだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Looking back on it now, what he said was also on the mark.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>昨年</rb><rt>さく ねん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>比</rb><rt>くら</rt></ruby>べると、<ruby><rb>今年</rb><rt>ことし</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>桜</rb><rt>さくら</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>開花</rb><rt>かい か</rt></ruby>がちょっと<ruby><rb>遅</rb><rt>おそ</rt></ruby>いようだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Compared with last year, this year the cherry blossoms seem to be coming into bloom a little later.</span></div><div class="explanation">When と is used after verbs of utterance, thought, or comparison, such as 言う (say), 見る (see), 考える (think), or 比べる (compare), it functions as an introductory expression indicating the viewpoint or stance from which the thing that follows will be stated. In this usage, と can often be substituted with the forms たら, ば, and なら.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x48329"><span class="number">7. </span>...からいうと<span class="reference">→<a href="part0155.xhtml#idsubtitlex1x13074">【からいう】1</a></span></h2><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x48337"><span class="number">8. </span>...からすると<span class="reference">→<a href="part0160.xhtml#idsubtitlex1x13353">【からする】1</a></span></h2><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x48345"><span class="number">9. </span>...からみると<span class="reference">→<a href="part0167.xhtml#idsubtitlex1x13563">【からみる】1</a></span></h2><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x48353"><span class="number">10. </span>...てみると<span class="reference">→<a href="part0495.xhtml#idsubtitlex1x44641">【てみる】3</a></span></h2><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x48361"><span class="number">11. </span>...というと<span class="reference">→<a href="part0524.xhtml#idtitlex1x49518">【というと】</a></span></h2><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x48368"><span class="number">12. </span>...となると<span class="reference">→<a href="part0609.xhtml#idtitlex1x57674">【となると】</a></span></h2><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x48375"><span class="number">13. </span>...ともなると<span class="reference">→<a href="part0634.xhtml#idtitlex1x59378">【ともなると】</a></span></h2><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x48382"><span class="number">14. </span>...によると<span class="reference">→<a href="part0842.xhtml#idtitlex1x74989">【によると】</a></span></h2><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x48389"><span class="number">15. </span>V-ようとV-まいと<span class="reference">→<a href="part1024.xhtml#idsubtitlex1x101845">【よう<sub class="Subscript">2</sub>】4</a></span></h2></body></html>