<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>しだい</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0265.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【しかも】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0267.xhtml">【したがって】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x20913">【しだい】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x20915"><span class="number">1. </span>Nしだいだ</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>するかしないかは、あなたしだいだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Whether you do it or not is up to you. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>世</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>中</rb><rt>なか</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>金</rb><rt>かね</rt></ruby>しだいでどうにでもなる。</span>／<span class="translation">Money makes the world go round.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>作物</rb><rt>さく もつ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>出来</rb><rt>で き</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>具合</rb><rt>ぐ あ</rt></ruby>いはこの<ruby><rb>夏</rb><rt>なつ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>天気</rb><rt>てん き</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>次第</rb><rt>し だい</rt></ruby>です。</span>／<span class="translation">The quality of the crops will depend on the weather this summer. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>結婚</rb><rt>けっ こん</rt></ruby>した<ruby><rb>相手次第</rb><rt>あい て し だい</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>人生</rb><rt>じん せい</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>決</rb><rt>きま</rt></ruby>ってしまうこともある。</span>／<span class="translation">Your life can be determined by the person you marry. </span></div><div class="explanation">Means “things vary according to N or are influenced by N.” Example (1) means “it is for you to decide.”</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x20952"><span class="number">2. </span>R-しだい</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>落</rb><rt>おと</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>物</rb><rt>もの</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>つかりしだい、お<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>らせします。</span>／<span class="translation">We will let you know as soon as the lost item is found. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>事件</rb><rt>じ けん</rt></ruby>のくわしい<ruby><rb>経過</rb><rt>けい か</rt></ruby>がわかりしだい、<ruby><rb>番組</rb><rt>ばん ぐみ</rt></ruby>のなかでお<ruby><rb>伝</rb><rt>つた</rt></ruby>えします。</span>／<span class="translation">We will bring you further reports on this program, as the details of the incident become known. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>資料</rb><rt>し りょう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>手</rb><rt>て</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>はい</rt></ruby>り<ruby><rb>次第</rb><rt>し だい</rt></ruby>、すぐに<ruby><rb>公表</rb><rt>こう ひょう</rt></ruby>するつもりだ。</span>／<span class="translation">As soon as we obtain the materials, we intend to make them public. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>天候</rb><rt>てん こう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>回復</rb><rt>かい ふく</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>次第</rb><rt>し だい</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>出航</rb><rt>しゅっ こう</rt></ruby>します。</span>／<span class="translation">We will set sail as soon as the weather clears.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “immediately after doing....” Expresses that as soon as one action or event is realized, the next action will be carried out. The first half of the sentence often describes an event that takes place as part of a natural progression. On the other hand, the second half of the sentence indicates an intentional action on the part of the speaker. It cannot refer to a spontaneously-occurring event or action.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>そのニュースが伝わり次第、暴動が起こるだろう。／As soon as the news spreads, a riot will probably happen. </div><div class="explanation">In addition, R-しだい cannot be used to refer to past events.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>休みになりしだい、旅行に行った。／As soon as the vacation starts, they went on a trip. </div><div class="explanation">Often used in TV news and the like, as in (2). </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x21026"><span class="number">3. </span>V-る／V-た　しだいだ</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>とりあえずお<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>らせした<ruby><rb>次第</rb><rt>し だい</rt></ruby>です。</span>／<span class="translation">The facts of the matter are as I have just told you. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>《<ruby><rb>挨拶状</rb><rt>あい さつ じょう</rt></ruby>》<ruby><rb>今後</rb><rt>こん ご</rt></ruby>ともよろしくご<ruby><rb>指導</rb><rt>し どう</rt></ruby>くださいますようお<ruby><rb>願</rb><rt>ねが</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>申</rb><rt>もう</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>げる<ruby><rb>次第</rb><rt>し だい</rt></ruby>でございます。</span>／<span class="translation">《letter of greeting》Therefore I humbly request your continued guidance in the future.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to describe the course of events that has led to the present state of affairs, the reason(s) behind it, etc. In idiomatic expressions, adjectives are sometimes used. </div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>こんなことになってしまい、まったくお恥ずかしい次第です。／I feel thoroughly embarrassed that it should have come to this.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x21060"><span class="number">4. </span>こととしだいによって</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>ことと<ruby><rb>次第</rb><rt>し だい</rt></ruby>によって、<ruby><rb>計画</rb><rt>けい かく</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>大幅</rb><rt>おお はば</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>変更</rb><rt>へん こう</rt></ruby>しなければならなくなるかもれない。</span>／<span class="translation">It all depends, but we may have to make drastic changes to the plan. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>ことと<ruby><rb>次第</rb><rt>し だい</rt></ruby>によっては、<ruby><rb>事件</rb><rt>じ けん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>当事者</rb><rt>とう じ しゃ</rt></ruby>だけでなく<ruby><rb>責任者</rb><rt>せき にん しゃ</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>罰</rb><rt>ばっ</rt></ruby>することになる。</span>／<span class="translation">Depending on what happens, not only the person involved in the incident but also the one in charge may be penalized. </span></div><div class="explanation">Used to preface a statement when the outcome of a course of events is uncertain or when something of importance is to be decided. An idiomatic expression.</div></body></html>