<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>というのも</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0526.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【というのは】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0528.xhtml">【というものだ】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x49874">【というのも】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x49876"><span class="number">1. </span>というのも</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>あの<ruby><rb>会社</rb><rt>かい しゃ</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>倒産</rb><rt>とう さん</rt></ruby>するかもしれませんよ。というのも、このところ<ruby><rb>急激</rb><rt>きゅう げき</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>株価</rb><rt>かぶ か</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>下</rb><rt>さ</rt></ruby>がっているんですよ。</span>／<span class="translation">That company might go bankrupt, you know. I say this because recently its stock prices have been falling drastically.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>昼</rb><rt>ひる</rt></ruby>だけでなく、<ruby><rb>夜</rb><rt>よる</rt></ruby>もアルバイトしている。というのも、<ruby><rb>親</rb><rt>おや</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>仕送</rb><rt>し おく</rt></ruby>りを<ruby><rb>受</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>けずに<ruby><rb>大学</rb><rt>だい がく</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>卒業</rb><rt>そつ ぎょう</rt></ruby>しようとしているからだ。</span>／<span class="translation">He works part-time, not only during the day but also at night. This is because he intends to graduate from university without any financial support from his parents.</span></div><div class="explanation">Essentially the same as というのは.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x49901"><span class="number">2. </span>というのも...からだ</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>転職</rb><rt>てん しょく</rt></ruby>したというのも、<ruby><rb>空気</rb><rt>くう き</rt></ruby>のきれいな<ruby><rb>田舎</rb><rt>いなか</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>病弱</rb><rt>びょう じゃく</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>強</rb><rt>つよ</rt></ruby>くしたいと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>ったからだ。</span>／<span class="translation">The reason he changed jobs was that he wanted to improve his sickly child’s health in the fresh air of the countryside.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>わざわざ<ruby><rb>横浜</rb><rt>よこ はま</rt></ruby>までそのレコードを<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>いに<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ったというのも、ただ<ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>喜</rb><rt>よろこ</rt></ruby>ばせたかったからだ。</span>／<span class="translation">His reason for making a special trip all the way to Yokohama to buy that album was just so he could please his girlfriend.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>青木</rb><rt>あお き</rt></ruby>さんが<ruby><rb>怒</rb><rt>おこ</rt></ruby>ったというのも、<ruby><rb>部下</rb><rt>ぶ か</rt></ruby>がみんなあまりにも<ruby><rb>怠惰</rb><rt>たい だ</rt></ruby>だったからだ。</span>／<span class="translation">The reason Aoki-san got angry was that all of his subordinates were so lazy.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>土地</rb><rt>と ち</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>売</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>るというのも、そうしなければ<ruby><rb>相続税</rb><rt>そう ぞく ぜい</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>払</rb><rt>はら</rt></ruby>えないからだ。</span>／<span class="translation">They have to sell the property; otherwise, they can’t pay the inheritance tax.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to explain the reason for an action that someone has already performed or has decided to perform. The particle も emphasizes that this is an extraordinary action. Instead of からだ, のだ may also be used.</div></body></html>