<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ないともかぎらない</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0662.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ないといい】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0664.xhtml">【ないまでも】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x61497">【ないともかぎらない】</h1><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>今日</rb><rt>きょう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>父</rb><rt>ちち</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>命日</rb><rt>めい にち</rt></ruby>だから、<ruby><rb>誰</rb><rt>だれ</rt></ruby>かが<ruby><rb>突然</rb><rt>とつ ぜん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>訪</rb><rt>たず</rt></ruby>ねてこないともかぎらない。</span>／<span class="translation">Today is the anniversary of my father’s death, so there’s no guarantee there won’t be anyone stopping by unannounced.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>鍵</rb><rt>かぎ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>直</rb><rt>なお</rt></ruby>しておかないと、また<ruby><rb>泥棒</rb><rt>どろ ぼう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>はい</rt></ruby>られないともかぎらない。</span>／<span class="translation">There is still a possibility that our house will be broken into again, unless we fix the lock.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>間違</rb><rt>ま ちが</rt></ruby>えないとも<ruby><rb>限</rb><rt>かぎ</rt></ruby>らないので、もう<ruby><rb>一度</rb><rt>いち ど</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>確認</rb><rt>かく にん</rt></ruby>した<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>ほう</rt></ruby>がいい。</span>／<span class="translation">You should check it one more time, because you can never be sure you haven’t made a mistake.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>事故</rb><rt>じ こ</rt></ruby>じゃないとも<ruby><rb>限</rb><rt>かぎ</rt></ruby>らないし、ちょっと<ruby><rb>電話</rb><rt>でん わ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>れてみた<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>ほう</rt></ruby>がいいかもしれない。</span>／<span class="translation">It might well have been an accident, so maybe you should try to give them a call.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means that something is not 100% certain. Often used to say that the listener should not complacently assume that nothing will happen but be prepared to take some kind of countermeasure. Usually attaches to negative-form expressions. However, いつ死ぬともかぎらない (below) is an exception. This is an idiomatic usage that takes an affirmative expression and means “no one knows when <span class="noSeparate">s/he</span> is going to die.”</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>人間いつ死ぬともかぎらないのだから、やりたいことはやりたい時にやった方がいい。／Since we don’t know when we’re going to die, we should do whatever we want, whenever we want.</div></body></html>