<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>のです</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0864.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【のである】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0866.xhtml">【のでは】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x77370">【のです】</h1><h4 class="info">［N／Na　なのです］</h4><h4 class="info">［A／V　のです］</h4><div class="explanation">This is the polite form of のだ. In spoken Japanese, のです is used in polite conversations. However, usually んです is used more often.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x77389"><span class="number">1. </span>...のです〈explanation〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>遅</rb><rt>おそ</rt></ruby>くなってすみません。<ruby><rb>途中</rb><rt>と ちゅう</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>渋滞</rb><rt>じゅう たい</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>巻</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>込</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>まれてしまったのです。</span>／<span class="translation">I’m sorry to be late. I got stuck in traffic on the way.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>電話</rb><rt>でん わ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>使</rb><rt>つか</rt></ruby>わせていただきたいのですが、よろしいでしょうか。</span>／<span class="translation">I’d like to make a call, so would it be all right if I used your phone?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>ハヤブサは<ruby><rb>突然</rb><rt>とつ ぜん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>急降下</rb><rt>きゅう こう か</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>始</rb><rt>はじ</rt></ruby>めました。<ruby><rb>獲物</rb><rt>え もの</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>つけたのです。</span>／<span class="translation">The falcon suddenly began to swoop down. It had spotted prey.</span></div><h4 class="reference">→<a href="part0858.xhtml#idsubtitlex1x76651">【のだ】1</a></h4><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x77418"><span class="number">2. </span>...のです〈claim〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>これからはあなたたちがこの<ruby><rb>店</rb><rt>みせ</rt></ruby>をまもり<ruby><rb>発展</rb><rt>はっ てん</rt></ruby>させて<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>くのです。</span>／<span class="translation">From now on it will be all of you who maintain and build up this store. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>やはり<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>考</rb><rt>かんが</rt></ruby>えは<ruby><rb>間違</rb><rt>ま ちが</rt></ruby>っていなかったのです。</span>／<span class="translation">As I’d expected, my thinking was not wrong.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>あなたはことの<ruby><rb>本質</rb><rt>ほん しつ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>理解</rb><rt>り かい</rt></ruby>していないのです。</span>／<span class="translation">You don’t understand the true nature of the matter.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>だれがなんと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>おうと、<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>辞</rb><rt>や</rt></ruby>めるのです。</span>／<span class="translation">Whatever anyone else may say, I’m going to quit my job.</span></div><h4 class="reference">→<a href="part0858.xhtml#idsubtitlex1x76685">【のだ】2</a></h4><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x77453"><span class="number">3. </span>...のです〈topic cue〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>先週</rb><rt>せん しゅう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>京都</rb><rt>きょう と</rt></ruby>へ<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ってきたのですが、そこで<ruby><rb>偶然</rb><rt>ぐう ぜん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>高橋</rb><rt>たか はし</rt></ruby>さんに<ruby><rb>会</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>いましてね。<ruby><rb>相変</rb><rt>あい か</rt></ruby>わらず<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>励</rb><rt>はげ</rt></ruby>んでいるようでした。</span>／<span class="translation">I went to Kyoto last week, and I ran into Takahashi-san there. It looks like she’s still plugging away at work, as usual.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>実</rb><rt>じつ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>近々</rb><rt>ちかぢか</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>結婚</rb><rt>けっ こん</rt></ruby>するのです。それでご<ruby><rb>挨拶</rb><rt>あい さつ</rt></ruby>にうかがいたいのですが、ご<ruby><rb>都合</rb><rt>つ ごう</rt></ruby>はいかがでしょうか。</span>／<span class="translation">As a matter of fact, I will be getting married quite soon, so I would like to pay you a visit. Could you tell me when it would be convenient for you?</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to create the opportunity to introduce a new topic by reporting a background situation or state of affairs.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x77478"><span class="number">4. </span>...のですか</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>どうして<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>犯人</rb><rt>はん にん</rt></ruby>だとわかったのですか。</span>／<span class="translation">How did you know he was guilty?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>田中</rb><rt>た なか</rt></ruby>さんはタフですね。なにかスポーツでもしているのですか。</span>／<span class="translation">You’re really tough, Tanaka-san. Do you play any sports?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><span class="number">A:</span>もうお<ruby><rb>帰</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>りになるのですか。</span>／<span class="translation">Are you going home now?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>ええ。ほかに<ruby><rb>用事</rb><rt>よう じ</rt></ruby>もありますので。</span>／<span class="translation">Yes. I have some other things to do.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used when the speaker asks the addressee for some kind of explanation regarding a situation at the time of speaking or the topic at hand. </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x77521"><span class="number">5. </span>つまり...のです</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>締切</rb><rt>しめ きり</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>今月末</rb><rt>こん げつ まつ</rt></ruby>、つまりあと5<ruby><rb>日</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>しかないのです。</span>／<span class="translation">The deadline is the end of this month. This means we have only five days left.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>いたいのは、<ruby><rb>緊急</rb><rt>きん きゅう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>対策</rb><rt>たい さく</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>打</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>たなければならないと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>うことなのです。</span>／<span class="translation">What I want to say is that we need to take countermeasures immediately. </span></div><h4 class="reference">→<a href="part0858.xhtml#idsubtitlex1x76741">【のだ】4</a></h4><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x77541"><span class="number">6. </span>だから...のだ</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>ずいぶん<ruby><rb>熱</rb><rt>ねつ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>高</rb><rt>たか</rt></ruby>いですよ。だから<ruby><rb>頭</rb><rt>あたま</rt></ruby>がいたかったのですね。</span>／<span class="translation">You have quite a high temperature. That’s why you had a headache, isn’t it.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>社長</rb><rt>しゃ ちょう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>信頼</rb><rt>しん らい</rt></ruby>していない。だからこの<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>任</rb><rt>まか</rt></ruby>せてもらえなかったのだ。</span>／<span class="translation">The company president doesn’t trust me. That’s why he didn’t give me this job.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>ここにすきまがあるようですね。そのために<ruby><rb>風</rb><rt>かぜ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>吹</rb><rt>ふ</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>込</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>んでくるのですよ。</span>／<span class="translation">It looks like there is a crack here. That’s why the wind is blowing in.</span></div><h4 class="reference">→<a href="part0858.xhtml#idsubtitlex1x76772">【のだ】5</a></h4><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x77567"><span class="number">7. </span>...のですから</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby>はあるのですから、ゆっくりやって<ruby><rb>下</rb><rt>くだ</rt></ruby>さい。</span>／<span class="translation">You have plenty of time, so please do it slowly.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>ここまで<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>たのだから、あともう<ruby><rb>一息</rb><rt>ひと いき</rt></ruby>です。</span>／<span class="translation">We’ve come this far, so one more push and we’ll be there.</span></div><h4 class="reference">→<a href="part0858.xhtml#idsubtitlex1x76803">【のだ】6</a></h4></body></html>