<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>をかわきりに</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part1066.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【をかわきりとして】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part1068.xhtml">【をかわきりにして】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x107582">【をかわきりに】</h1><h4 class="info">［Nをかわきりに］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>店長</rb><rt>てん ちょう</rt></ruby>としての<ruby><rb>成功</rb><rt>せい こう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>皮切</rb><rt>かわ き</rt></ruby>りに、どんどん<ruby><rb>事業</rb><rt>じ ぎょう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>広</rb><rt>ひろ</rt></ruby>げ、<ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>だい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>実業家</rb><rt>じつ ぎょう か</rt></ruby>になった。</span>／<span class="translation">With her success as store manager as the starting point, she rapidly expanded the business and became a big businesswoman.  </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>その<ruby><rb>歌</rb><rt>うた</rt></ruby>のヒットを<ruby><rb>皮切</rb><rt>かわ き</rt></ruby>りに、<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>らはコマーシャル、<ruby><rb>映画</rb><rt>えい が</rt></ruby>、ミュージカルなどあらゆる<ruby><rb>分野</rb><rt>ぶん や</rt></ruby>へ<ruby><rb>進出</rb><rt>しん しゅつ</rt></ruby>していった。</span>／<span class="translation">After that song became a hit they went on to appear in commercials, movies, musicals, and many other fields.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>太鼓</rb><rt>たい こ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>合図</rb><rt>あい ず</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>皮切</rb><rt>かわ き</rt></ruby>りに、<ruby><rb>祭</rb><rt>まつ</rt></ruby>りの<ruby><rb>行列</rb><rt>ぎょう れつ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>繰</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>り<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>だ</rt></ruby>した。</span>／<span class="translation">At the <i>taiko</i>’s signal, the festival procession set out.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “with that as the starting point.” Usually, a situation in which something prospers or develops rapidly comes afterwards. May also be used in the forms ...をかわきりにして and ...をかわきりとして.</div></body></html>