<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>たかだか</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0368.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【たかが】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0370.xhtml">【だから】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x29206">【たかだか】</h1><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>あれはそんなに<ruby><rb>高</rb><rt>たか</rt></ruby>くないと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>うよ。たかだか 3000 <ruby><rb>円</rb><rt>えん</rt></ruby>ぐらいのもんだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">I don’t think that (item) is so expensive. Probably only about 3,000 yen, at most.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>今度</rb><rt>こん ど</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>出張</rb><rt>しゅっ ちょう</rt></ruby>はそんなに<ruby><rb>長</rb><rt>なが</rt></ruby>くならないでしょう。のびたとしても、たかだか<ruby><rb>一週間</rb><rt>いっ しゅう かん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>程度</rb><rt>てい ど</rt></ruby>のものだと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>います。</span>／<span class="translation">I don’t think this business trip will be very long. Even if it’s extended, I think it’ll only be about a week at most.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>ちょっとぐらい<ruby><rb>遅刻</rb><rt>ち こく</rt></ruby>してもしかられないよ。あの<ruby><rb>先生</rb><rt>せん せい</rt></ruby>なら、たかだか「これから<ruby><rb>気</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>をつけてください」と<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>う<ruby><rb>程度</rb><rt>てい ど</rt></ruby>だと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>うよ。</span>／<span class="translation">You won’t get scolded for being a little late. I think the most that teacher will say is just “be careful from now on.”</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>長生</rb><rt>なが い</rt></ruby>きしたとしてもたかだか90 <ruby><rb>年</rb><rt>ねん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>人生</rb><rt>じん せい</rt></ruby>だ。<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>一瞬</rb><rt>いっ しゅん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>一瞬</rb><rt>いっ しゅん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>生</rb><rt>せい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>充実感</rb><rt>じゅう じつ かん</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>満</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>たされているような、そんな<ruby><rb>人生</rb><rt>じん せい</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>送</rb><rt>おく</rt></ruby>りたいと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>っている。</span>／<span class="translation">Even a long life is not more than ninety years. I want to live a life in which every moment is filled with a sense of accomplishment.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to make a conjecture that the quantity or extent of something probably won’t be very great, even based on a generous estimate. Often used with ぐらい or 程度. Cannot be used if the speaker is stating something as a fact rather than an assumption.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>これは安かったですよ。たかだか 2000 円でした。／This was cheap. It was at most 2,000 yen.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>たった 2000 円でした。／This was only 2,000 yen.</div></body></html>