<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>にひきかえ</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0824.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【にはんして】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0826.xhtml">【にほかならない】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x73840">【にひきかえ】</h1><h4 class="info">［Nにひきかえ］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>兄</rb><rt>あに</rt></ruby>にひきかえ<ruby><rb>弟</rb><rt>おとうと</rt></ruby>はだれにでも<ruby><rb>好</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>かれる<ruby><rb>好青年</rb><rt>こう せい ねん</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">In contrast to his elder brother, he is a pleasant young man that everybody likes. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>努力家</rb><rt>ど りょく か</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>姉</rb><rt>あね</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>引</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby>きかえ、<ruby><rb>弟</rb><rt>おとうと</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>怠</rb><rt>なま</rt></ruby>け<ruby><rb>者</rb><rt>もの</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">In contrast to his hardworking elder sister, he is a lazy oaf.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>このごろは<ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>っぽい<ruby><rb>男子</rb><rt>だん し</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>学生</rb><rt>がく せい</rt></ruby>にひきかえ<ruby><rb>女子</rb><rt>じょ し</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>学生</rb><rt>がく せい</rt></ruby>のほうが<ruby><rb>社会性</rb><rt>しゃ かい せい</rt></ruby>があってしっかりしているようだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Recently, the female students are more sociable and stable than the childish male students.  </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>市当局</rb><rt>し とう きょく</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>柔軟</rb><rt>じゅう なん</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>姿勢</rb><rt>し せい</rt></ruby>にひきかえ、<ruby><rb>窓口</rb><rt>まど ぐち</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>高圧的</rb><rt>こう あつ てき</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>対応</rb><rt>たい おう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>市民</rb><rt>し みん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>反発</rb><rt>はん ぱつ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>招</rb><rt>まね</rt></ruby>いている。</span>／<span class="translation">In contrast to the flexible attitude of the city authorities, the oppressive way they are treated at the window meets with strong opposition from citizens.</span></div><div class="explanation">Comparing two contrastive items, expresses the meaning of “in contrast to the one, the other is/does....” In spoken Japanese, Nにくらべて is used instead. </div></body></html>