<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>より</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part1041.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【よもや】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part1043.xhtml">【よる】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x104729">【より】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x104731"><span class="number">1. </span>...より（も／は）</h2><h4 class="info">［N／V　より（も／は）］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>今年</rb><rt>ことし</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>冬</rb><rt>ふゆ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>昨年</rb><rt>さく ねん</rt></ruby>よりも<ruby><rb>寒</rb><rt>さむ</rt></ruby>い。</span>／<span class="translation">This winter is colder than last year’s.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>このシャツの<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>ほう</rt></ruby>がさっき<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>たのより<ruby><rb>色</rb><rt>いろ</rt></ruby>がきれいだ。</span>／<span class="translation">The color of this shirt is nicer than the one we saw before.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>休</rb><rt>やす</rt></ruby>みの<ruby><rb>日</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>外</rb><rt>そと</rt></ruby>へ<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>かけるよりうちでごろごろしている<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>ほう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>好</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>きだ。</span>／<span class="translation">On holiday days I like to be idle at home rather than go outside.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>田中</rb><rt>た なか</rt></ruby>さんの<ruby><rb>送別会</rb><rt>そう べつ かい</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>予想</rb><rt>よ そう</rt></ruby>していたよりずっと<ruby><rb>多</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>くの<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>集</rb><rt>あつ</rt></ruby>まってくれました。</span>／<span class="translation">Many more people than expected gathered for Tanaka-san’s farewell party.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>やらずに<ruby><rb>後悔</rb><rt>こう かい</rt></ruby>するよりは、<ruby><rb>無理</rb><rt>む り</rt></ruby>にでもやってみた<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>ほう</rt></ruby>がいい。</span>／<span class="translation">You would be better off having a go at it, however impossible it may seem, than regretting afterwards not having even tried.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>ったよりも<ruby><rb>大変</rb><rt>たい へん</rt></ruby>だった。</span>／<span class="translation">The job was more difficult than I had thought.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（7）</span><ruby><rb>事件</rb><rt>じ けん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>背景</rb><rt>はい けい</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>考</rb><rt>かんが</rt></ruby>えていたよりも<ruby><rb>複雑</rb><rt>ふく ざつ</rt></ruby>なようだ。</span>／<span class="translation">It seems that the circumstances of the incident are more complicated than I had thought.</span></div><div class="explanation">In the forms XよりもYのほうがZ and YはXよりもZ, shows X as the standard for comparison. In casual conversation the forms such as the following can also be used: よりか, それよか.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>レストランよりか居酒屋の方がリラックスできていいんじゃないかな。／I think a bar is better than a restaurant because we can relax there. </div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>今から外食しに行くのもいいけど、それよか一緒に買い物に行ってうちで作って食べない？／We could eat out but, rather than do that, why don’t we go shopping together and then cook at home?</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x104806"><span class="number">2. </span>...というより</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>堅</rb><rt>けん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>実家</rb><rt>じつ か</rt></ruby>というよりけちだと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>う<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>ほう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>当</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>たっている。</span>／<span class="translation">It’s closer to the mark to see him as stingy rather than prudent.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>はきれいというよりはむしろ<ruby><rb>個性的</rb><rt>こ せい てき</rt></ruby>なタイプで、<ruby><rb>独特</rb><rt>どく とく</rt></ruby>のファッション<ruby><rb>感覚</rb><rt>かん かく</rt></ruby>がある。</span>／<span class="translation">More than just being pretty, she is a unique type; she has her very own sense of fashion.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>書</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>いた<ruby><rb>英文</rb><rt>えい ぶん</rt></ruby>は、できが<ruby><rb>悪</rb><rt>わる</rt></ruby>いというより、むしろもう<ruby><rb>絶望的</rb><rt>ぜつ ぼう てき</rt></ruby>だと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>った<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>ほう</rt></ruby>がいいくらいひどい。</span>／<span class="translation">His English composition wasn’t just bad; I’d rather say it was so horrible as to be hopeless.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>あいつは<ruby><rb>酒</rb><rt>さけ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>飲</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>むというより<ruby><rb>流</rb><rt>なが</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>込</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>むと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>った<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>ほう</rt></ruby>がいいような<ruby><rb>飲</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>み<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>かた</rt></ruby>をする。</span>／<span class="translation">That guy’s way of drinking <i>sake</i> is not so much drinking as it is pouring it down.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>こんなパーティーは、<ruby><rb>楽</rb><rt>たの</rt></ruby>しいというよりも<ruby><rb>退屈</rb><rt>たい くつ</rt></ruby>なだけで、<ruby><rb>一部</rb><rt>いち ぶ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>のためのバカ<ruby><rb>騒</rb><rt>さわ</rt></ruby>ぎとしか<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>えない。</span>／<span class="translation">This kind of party is actually just boring rather than fun, and I can’t think of it as anything other than horseplay for a small group of people.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to compare ways of expressions about or ways of judging a certain thing. Means “You could say X, or see it X way but, in comparison Y is more appropriate.” As in examples (2) and (3), it is often used together with むしろ.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x104852"><span class="number">3. </span>...よりない</h2><h3 class="subsubtitle" id="idsubsubtitlex1x104855"><span class="number">a. </span>V-るよりない</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>どうしても<ruby><rb>大学</rb><rt>だい がく</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>通</rb><rt>かよ</rt></ruby>う<ruby><rb>気</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>起</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>きないのなら、もう<ruby><rb>退学</rb><rt>たい がく</rt></ruby>するよりないだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">If you can’t bring yourself to attend lectures, there’s nothing to do but drop out of university.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>文句</rb><rt>もん く</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>っても<ruby><rb>仕方</rb><rt>し かた</rt></ruby>がない。とりあえず<ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>できることを<ruby><rb>一生懸命</rb><rt>いっ しょう けん めい</rt></ruby>やるよりない。</span>／<span class="translation">It’s no use complaining. For now, all we can do is give it our very best effort.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>こんな<ruby><rb>不景気</rb><rt>ふ けい き</rt></ruby>なら、どこでもいいから<ruby><rb>採用</rb><rt>さい よう</rt></ruby>してくれるところに<ruby><rb>就職</rb><rt>しゅう しょく</rt></ruby>するよりなさそうだ。</span>／<span class="translation">It seems that, in this kind of recession, all we can do is look for work anywhere they will employ us.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses that, in situations where there is a problem, there is no other way of resolving it. ...しかない and ...以外にない can also be used.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x104886"><span class="number">b. </span>V-るよりほか（に／は）ない</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>さらあれはうそだったとも<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>えないし、<ruby><rb>隠</rb><rt>かく</rt></ruby>しとおすよりほかにない。</span>／<span class="translation">At this point we can’t say that it was a lie, so we have no choice but to cover it up.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>雪</rb><rt>ゆき</rt></ruby>はだんだん<ruby><rb>激</rb><rt>はげ</rt></ruby>しくなってきたが、<ruby><rb>引</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>返</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>すこともできないし、とにかく<ruby><rb>山小屋</rb><rt>やま ご や</rt></ruby>まで<ruby><rb>歩</rb><rt>ある</rt></ruby>くよりほかはなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">The snow gradually became stronger, but as we couldn’t retrace our steps, we had no choice but to walk on to the mountain hut.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>放</rb><rt>ほう</rt></ruby>っておけばあの<ruby><rb>地域</rb><rt>ち いき</rt></ruby>のリゾート<ruby><rb>開発</rb><rt>かい はつ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>進</rb><rt>すす</rt></ruby>む<ruby><rb>一方</rb><rt>いっ ぽう</rt></ruby>だし、こうなったら<ruby><rb>反対</rb><rt>はん たい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>運動</rb><rt>うん どう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>起</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>こすよりほかにないと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>った。</span>／<span class="translation">I thought that, if we ignored it, the development of the region’s resorts would proceed, so in that case, I had no choice but to start an opposition movement. </span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses that, in situations in which there is a problem, there is no other way to resolve it. ...しかない and ...以外にない are also used.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x104917"><span class="number">c. </span>...よりほかに...ない</h3><h4 class="info">［Nよりほかに...ない］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-るよりほかに...ない］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>その<ruby><rb>部屋</rb><rt>へ や</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>静</rb><rt>しず</rt></ruby>かで、<ruby><rb>時計</rb><rt>と けい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>音</rb><rt>おと</rt></ruby>よりほかに<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>物音</rb><rt>もの おと</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>聞</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>こえなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">The room was quiet and, apart from the ticking of the clock, you couldn’t hear a sound.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>田中</rb><rt>た なか</rt></ruby>さんよりほかにこの<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>任</rb><rt>まか</rt></ruby>せられる<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>はいない。</span>／<span class="translation">There’s nobody other than Tanaka-san to whom I can entrust this job.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>あなたよりほかに<ruby><rb>頼</rb><rt>たよ</rt></ruby>れる<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>がいないから、<ruby><rb>忙</rb><rt>いそが</rt></ruby>しいのを<ruby><rb>承知</rb><rt>しょう ち</rt></ruby>でお<ruby><rb>願</rb><rt>ねが</rt></ruby>いしているのです。</span>／<span class="translation">There’s nobody but you I can depend on, so while I know that you’re busy, I’m asking you (this favor).</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>せっかくのお<ruby><rb>休</rb><rt>やす</rt></ruby>みで<ruby><rb>天気</rb><rt>てん き</rt></ruby>もいいのに、うちでテレビを<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>るよりほかにすることはないのですか。</span>／<span class="translation">It’s finally the holidays and the weather is good, so don’t you have anything other to do than watch television inside?</span></div><div class="explanation">Used with a negative expression coming afterwards to emphasize that “there is nothing other than that.” ...以外に...ない is also used.  </div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x104958"><span class="number">d. </span>V-るよりしかたがない</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>お<ruby><rb>金</rb><rt>かね</rt></ruby>がないのなら、<ruby><rb>旅行</rb><rt>りょ こう</rt></ruby>はあきらめるよりしかたがないね。</span>／<span class="translation">If you have no money, you have no choice but to give up your trip.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>自分</rb><rt>じ ぶん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>失敗</rb><rt>しっ ぱい</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>自分</rb><rt>じ ぶん</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>責任</rb><rt>せき にん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>持</rb><rt>も</rt></ruby>って<ruby><rb>始末</rb><rt>し まつ</rt></ruby>するよりしかたがない。</span>／<span class="translation">There is no other option but to deal with your failings by taking responsibility for them yourself.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>終電</rb><rt>しゅう でん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>てしまったので、タクシーで<ruby><rb>帰</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>るよりしかたがなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">As the last train had left I had no other option but to go home by taxi.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>あさってからスキーに<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>きたいのなら、さっさとレポートを<ruby><rb>書</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>いてしまうよりしかたがないでしょう。</span>／<span class="translation">If you want to go skiing after tomorrow, you have no choice but to hurry up and finish writing the report, you know.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses that, although with reluctance, there is no other choice in order to resolve a situation. ...ほかしかたがない and ...以外にしかたがない are also used.</div></body></html>