<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>べつに</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0923.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【べつとして】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0925.xhtml">【べつにして】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x85708">【べつに】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x85710"><span class="number">1. </span>べつに...ない</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>別</rb><rt>べつ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>変</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>わったことは<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なに</rt></ruby>もない。</span>／<span class="translation">Nothing has really changed.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>会社</rb><rt>かい しゃ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>宴会</rb><rt>えん かい</rt></ruby>など<ruby><rb>別</rb><rt>べつ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>きたくはないが、<ruby><rb>断</rb><rt>こと</rt></ruby>わる<ruby><rb>適当</rb><rt>てき とう</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>理由</rb><rt>り ゆう</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>つからないので、しかたなく<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>くことにした。</span>／<span class="translation">Though I really didn’t want to attend the company party, since I could not find any appropriate reason to refuse, I decided to go as a duty.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>どき<ruby><rb>洋酒</rb><rt>よう しゅ</rt></ruby>なんか、<ruby><rb>別</rb><rt>べつ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>珍</rb><rt>めずら</rt></ruby>しくはないが、<ruby><rb>海外旅行</rb><rt>かい がい りょ こう</rt></ruby>のおみやげにとわざわざ<ruby><rb>持</rb><rt>も</rt></ruby>ってきてくれた<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>気持</rb><rt>き も</rt></ruby>ちがうれしい。</span>／<span class="translation">Although these days western liquors aren’t particularly unusual, I appreciate his kindness to make a special effort to bring some back as a present from his recent trip abroad.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>あなたなんかいなくても、<ruby><rb>別</rb><rt>べつ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>困</rb><rt>こま</rt></ruby>らないわ。</span>／<span class="translation">I wouldn’t miss you at all if you weren’t around!</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><span class="number">A:</span>どうかしたの。</span>／<span class="translation">Is anything the matter?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>いや、べつに。</span>／<span class="translation">No, nothing in particular.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “not especially” or “not particularly ....”  As in the case of (5), ...ない may be omitted.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x85765"><span class="number">2. </span>（...とは）べつに</h2><h4 class="info">［Nとはべつに］</h4><h4 class="info">［Vのとはべつに］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>料金</rb><rt>りょう きん</rt></ruby>とは<ruby><rb>別</rb><rt>べつ</rt></ruby>に 600 <ruby><rb>円</rb><rt>えん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>送料</rb><rt>そう りょう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>必要</rb><rt>ひつ よう</rt></ruby>です。</span>／<span class="translation">It requires 600 yen as postage, in addition to the charge.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>サービス<ruby><rb>料</rb><rt>りょう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>別</rb><rt>べつ</rt></ruby>にいただきます。</span>／<span class="translation">A service charge will be added to the bill. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>みんなに<ruby><rb>配</rb><rt>くば</rt></ruby>ったのとは<ruby><rb>別</rb><rt>べつ</rt></ruby>に、<ruby><rb>君</rb><rt>きみ</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>特別</rb><rt>とく べつ</rt></ruby>なプレゼントを<ruby><rb>用意</rb><rt>よう い</rt></ruby>しておいた。</span>／<span class="translation">Apart from what was distributed to everybody, I have prepared a special present for you.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>昨日</rb><rt>きのう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>たのとは<ruby><rb>別</rb><rt>べつ</rt></ruby>に、もうひとつ<ruby><rb>小包</rb><rt>こ づつみ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>ています。</span>／<span class="translation">In addition to the one that arrived yesterday, another parcel has come.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>映画館</rb><rt>えい が かん</rt></ruby>はすごく<ruby><rb>込</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>んでいたので、<ruby><rb>友</rb><rt>とも</rt></ruby>だちとは<ruby><rb>別</rb><rt>べつ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>座</rb><rt>すわ</rt></ruby>ることにした。</span>／<span class="translation">As the cinema was very crowded, I decided to sit separately from my friends.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>旅館</rb><rt>りょ かん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>泊</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>まった<ruby><rb>私達</rb><rt>わたし たち</rt></ruby>とは<ruby><rb>別</rb><rt>べつ</rt></ruby>にとなりの<ruby><rb>町</rb><rt>まち</rt></ruby>のホテルに<ruby><rb>泊</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>まった。</span>／<span class="translation">She stayed in a different hotel in the next town while we stayed in an inn.</span></div><div class="explanation">(1)-(4) show “apart from ...” or “except ....” (5) and (6) mean “away from ...” or “different from ....”</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x85817"><span class="number">3. </span>Nべつに</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>クラス<ruby><rb>別</rb><rt>べつ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>写真</rb><rt>しゃ しん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>撮</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>った。</span>／<span class="translation">We took photos of each class separately.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>小学校</rb><rt>しょう がっ こう</rt></ruby>や<ruby><rb>中学校</rb><rt>ちゅう がっ こう</rt></ruby>では<ruby><rb>男女別</rb><rt>だん じょ べつ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>名簿</rb><rt>めい ぼ</rt></ruby>をつくるのをやめようという<ruby><rb>動</rb><rt>うご</rt></ruby>きがある。</span>／<span class="translation">There is a movement among elementary and junior high schools for not producing separate student rosters according to sex.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>アンケートの<ruby><rb>結果</rb><rt>けっ か</rt></ruby>を、<ruby><rb>年齢別</rb><rt>ねん れい べつ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>集計</rb><rt>しゅう けい</rt></ruby>した。</span>／<span class="translation">The results of the questionnaire have been tabulated according to age.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>調査</rb><rt>ちょう さ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>結果</rb><rt>けっ か</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>国別</rb><rt>くに べつ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>ていくと、<ruby><rb>中国</rb><rt>ちゅう ごく</rt></ruby>をはじめとしたアジアの<ruby><rb>国々</rb><rt>くに ぐに</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>経済</rb><rt>けい ざい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>成長</rb><rt>せい ちょう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>著</rb><rt>いちじる</rt></ruby>しいことがわかる。</span>／<span class="translation">When we examine the results of the survey by country, it becomes apparent that the economic development in China and other Asian countries is remarkable.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “by N” or “N as a standard.”</div></body></html>