<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>うる</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0077.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【うち】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0079.xhtml">【える】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x7449">【うる】</h1><h4 class="info">［R-うる］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>失敗</rb><rt>しっ ぱい</rt></ruby>するなんてありえない。</span>／<span class="translation">It’s impossible for him to fail.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>それは<ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>になしえた<ruby><rb>最大限</rb><rt>さい だい げん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>努力</rb><rt>ど りょく</rt></ruby>だったに<ruby><rb>違</rb><rt>ちが</rt></ruby>いない。</span>／<span class="translation">It must been the best effort that she could put forth.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>その<ruby><rb>絵</rb><rt>え</rt></ruby>のすばらしさは、とても<ruby><rb>言葉</rb><rt>こと ば</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>表</rb><rt>あらわ</rt></ruby>しうるものではない。</span>／<span class="translation">It can’t be described in words how wonderful that picture is.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>確</rb><rt>たし</rt></ruby>かに<ruby><rb>外国人</rb><rt>がい こく じん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>労働者</rb><rt>ろうどうしゃ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>増</rb><rt>ふ</rt></ruby>えればそういう<ruby><rb>問題</rb><rt>もん だい</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>起</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>こり<ruby><rb>得</rb><rt>え</rt></ruby>るだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">If the number of foreign workers increases, those kinds of problems might possibly occur, too.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>自殺</rb><rt>じ さつ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>誰</rb><rt>だれ</rt></ruby>もが<ruby><rb>予期</rb><rt>よ き</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>得</rb><rt>え</rt></ruby>なかったことだけに、そのショックは<ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>きかった。</span>／<span class="translation">No one could have expected his suicide, so it was a great shock to us.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>ぶりには<ruby><rb>失望</rb><rt>しつ ぼう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>念</rb><rt>ねん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>禁</rb><rt>きん</rt></ruby>じ<ruby><rb>得</rb><rt>え</rt></ruby>ない。</span>／<span class="translation">I cannot help being disappointed with his way of working.</span></div><div class="explanation">うる joins to a verb stem. Both うる and える can be used in the dictionary form, but in the <i>masu</i>-form, negative form, and <i>ta</i>-form, only えます, えない, and えたare used. These expressions mean “one can do a certain action” or “it is possible that a certain situation will be realized.” In the negative, it means “one cannot do an action” or “it is impossible for a situation to be realized.” V-れる indicates potential, as in 書ける and 読める, and is only used with volitional verbs. うる, on the other hand, can also be used with non-volitional verbs, as in (1) and (4). However, unlike V-れる, it cannot be used to express an ability.   </div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>彼はフランス語が話しうる。／He is possible to speak French.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>彼はフランス語が話せる。／He can speak French.</div><div class="explanation">Generally considered to be written language, but ありえない can also be used in daily conversation. </div></body></html>