<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>おなじ</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0097.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【おそれがある】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0099.xhtml">【おぼえはない】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x8292">【おなじ】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x8294"><span class="number">1. </span>...とおなじ</h2><h4 class="info">［Nとおなじ］</h4><h4 class="info">［Vのとおなじ］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>このステレオはうちのと<ruby><rb>同</rb><rt>おな</rt></ruby>じだ。</span>／<span class="translation">This stereo is the same as ours.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>この<ruby><rb>本</rb><rt>ほん</rt></ruby>はあの<ruby><rb>本</rb><rt>ほん</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>出版社</rb><rt>しゅっ ぱん しゃ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>同</rb><rt>おな</rt></ruby>じだ。</span>／<span class="translation">This book has the same publisher as that one.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>この<ruby><rb>点</rb><rt>てん</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>妥協</rb><rt>だ きょう</rt></ruby>することはすべてをあきらめるのと<ruby><rb>同</rb><rt>おな</rt></ruby>じことだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Compromising on this point is tantamount to abandoning everything.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>あの<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べているのと<ruby><rb>同</rb><rt>おな</rt></ruby>じものをください。</span>／<span class="translation">Please give me the same thing that person is eating.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>ヒンディー<ruby><rb>語</rb><rt>ご</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>英語</rb><rt>えい ご</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>同</rb><rt>おな</rt></ruby>じインド・ヨーロッパ<ruby><rb>語族</rb><rt>ご ぞく</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>言語</rb><rt>げん ご</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">Hindi is an Indo-European language, just like English.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means that two objects or things are equivalent.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x8341"><span class="number">2. </span>おなじV-る　なら／のだったら</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>同</rb><rt>おな</rt></ruby>じ<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>うなら、<ruby><rb>少々</rb><rt>しょう しょう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>高</rb><rt>たか</rt></ruby>くても<ruby><rb>長持</rb><rt>なが も</rt></ruby>ちするものの<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>ほう</rt></ruby>がいい。</span>／<span class="translation">If I am going to buy one, I want something that lasts for a long time, even if it is a little more expensive.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>久</rb><rt>ひさ</rt></ruby>しぶりの<ruby><rb>旅行</rb><rt>りょ こう</rt></ruby>なんだから、<ruby><rb>同</rb><rt>おな</rt></ruby>じ<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>くんだったら<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>切</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>って<ruby><rb>遠</rb><rt>とお</rt></ruby>くに<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>きたいな。</span>／<span class="translation">This is my first trip in a while, so as long as I’m going, I want to take the plunge and travel somewhere really far away.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>同</rb><rt>おな</rt></ruby>じお<ruby><rb>金</rb><rt>かね</rt></ruby>をかけるのなら、<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べてなくなるものでなく、いつまでも<ruby><rb>使</rb><rt>つか</rt></ruby>えるものにかける<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>ほう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>意味</rb><rt>い み</rt></ruby>があると<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>う。</span>／<span class="translation">If I’m going to spend the money, I think it makes more sense to spend it on something I can use for a long time rather than something to eat, which doesn’t last.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>一緒</rb><rt>いっ しょ</rt></ruby>にフランス<ruby><rb>語</rb><rt>ご</rt></ruby>か<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なに</rt></ruby>か<ruby><rb>習</rb><rt>なら</rt></ruby>いに<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>かない？</span>／<span class="translation">Shall we take French classes or something together?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>そうねえ、フランス<ruby><rb>語</rb><rt>ご</rt></ruby>もいいけど、<ruby><rb>同</rb><rt>おな</rt></ruby>じ<ruby><rb>習</rb><rt>なら</rt></ruby>うんだったら<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>のやってないような<ruby><rb>言語</rb><rt>げん ご</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>ほう</rt></ruby>がいいと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>わない？</span>／<span class="translation">Well, sure, French would be fine, but if we’re going to study a language, don’t you think it would be better to study one that no one else does?</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “as long as one is going to do a particular thing.” When there are many ways to do something, this pattern is used to state the best way. Similar to どうせなら and せっかくなら.</div></body></html>