<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>なくて</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0673.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【なくちゃ】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0675.xhtml">【なくては】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x62343">【なくて】</h1><h4 class="info">［Nがなくて］</h4><h4 class="info">［N／Na　でなくて］</h4><h4 class="info">［A-くなくて］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-なくて］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>検査</rb><rt>けん さ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>結果</rb><rt>けっ か</rt></ruby>、ガンでなくて<ruby><rb>安心</rb><rt>あん しん</rt></ruby>した。</span>／<span class="translation">I was relieved to find out from the test results that I don’t have cancer.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>結婚</rb><rt>けっ こん</rt></ruby>した<ruby><rb>頃</rb><rt>ころ</rt></ruby>は、お<ruby><rb>金</rb><rt>かね</rt></ruby>がなくて<ruby><rb>苦労</rb><rt>く ろう</rt></ruby>した。</span>／<span class="translation">When we got married, we had no money so we had a really hard time.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>体</rb><rt>からだ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>丈夫</rb><rt>じょう ぶ</rt></ruby>でなくて<ruby><rb>大変</rb><rt>たい へん</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">I’m having a hard time because my child’s health is not very good. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>ったより<ruby><rb>高</rb><rt>たか</rt></ruby>くなくてほっとした。</span>／<span class="translation">I can breathe easily now, since it’s less expensive than I had expected.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>ちっとも<ruby><rb>雨</rb><rt>あめ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>降</rb><rt>ふ</rt></ruby>らなくて<ruby><rb>困</rb><rt>こま</rt></ruby>っている。</span>／<span class="translation">We are in a bad way because it hasn’t rained a bit. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span>あいつが<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>なくて<ruby><rb>助</rb><rt>たす</rt></ruby>かった。</span>／<span class="translation">I’m glad that guy didn’t come.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “since such-and-such did not happen/is not the case.” The clause that ends with なくて indicates the cause or reason for the situation or event described in the subsequent clause. The subsequent clause includes an expression describing the speaker’s emotion or evaluation, such as 安心する (be relieved), 困る (be in trouble/be at a loss), or 助かる (be saved some trouble).</div><div class="explanation">However, なくて essentially indicates that the events or situations in the first and second clauses are realized simultaneously. Its main function is not to specify a cause or reason. Because of this, it often sounds unnatural if なくて is replaced by ないので or ないから (see examples above).</div></body></html>