<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>もし</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0981.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【もさることながら】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0983.xhtml">【もしかしたら】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x97081">【もし】</h1><div class="explanation">With a conditional phrase following it, this expression conveys the speaker’s attitude in establishing <span class="noSeparate">his/her</span> assumptions about a thing. It is often used at the beginning of a sentence. Synonyms are かりに and もしも. For the differences between this and もしも, see the entry for もしも.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x97093"><span class="number">1. </span>もし...たら</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>もし<ruby><rb>雨</rb><rt>あめ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>降</rb><rt>ふ</rt></ruby>ってきたら、<ruby><rb>洗濯物</rb><rt>せん たく もの</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>取</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>り<ruby><rb>込</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>んでおいてね。</span>／<span class="translation">If it starts to rain, bring the washing in, will you?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>もしよろしければ、<ruby><rb>週末</rb><rt>しゅう まつ</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>家</rb><rt>いえ</rt></ruby>にいらっしゃいませんか。</span>／<span class="translation">If it’s all right with you, would you come to my home this weekend?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>もしお<ruby><rb>暇</rb><rt>ひま</rt></ruby>なら、いっしょにドライブに<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>きませんか。</span>／<span class="translation">If you have time, will you come for a drive with me?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>もし<ruby><rb>気</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>付</rb><rt>つ</rt></ruby>くのが1<ruby><rb>秒</rb><rt>びょう</rt></ruby>でも<ruby><rb>遅</rb><rt>おそ</rt></ruby>かったら<ruby><rb>大惨事</rb><rt>だい さん じ</rt></ruby>になっていただろう。</span>／<span class="translation">If you had noticed just one second later, it would have been a huge disaster.</span></div><div class="explanation">Phrases such as ...は／...なら can be used in place of たら. Accompanying a hypothetical situation where what follows is a result of that situation, means “supposing... then....” As in examples (1) to (3), it is used to predict or imagine an event, the truth of which is pending or not yet known, and, as in (4), it is used to anticipate or imagine an event which is inconsistent with reality.</div><div class="explanation">This is similar to かりに, but かりに is used to suppose something which does not actually exist, while もし can be used whether or not something actually exists, but the speaker desires to make a supposition. For this reason, it can be used both in (1), where something is likely to happen, and in (4), which is contrary to the truth.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>かりに雨が降ってきたら、洗濯物を取り込んでおいてね。／Supposing that it should start to rain, bring the washing in, will you?</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x97149"><span class="number">2. </span>もし　...ても／...としても</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>天気</rb><rt>てん き</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>予報</rb><rt>よ ほう</rt></ruby>では<ruby><rb>曇</rb><rt>くも</rt></ruby>りですが、もし<ruby><rb>雨</rb><rt>あめ</rt></ruby>でも<ruby><rb>遠足</rb><rt>えん そく</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>決行</rb><rt>けっ こう</rt></ruby>します。</span>／<span class="translation">The weather forecast says it will be cloudy, but even if it rains, we’ll go on the field trip.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>薬</rb><rt>くすり</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>治</rb><rt>なお</rt></ruby>りそうですが、もし<ruby><rb>手術</rb><rt>しゅ じゅつ</rt></ruby>をすることになっても、<ruby><rb>簡単</rb><rt>かん たん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>済</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>みます。</span>／<span class="translation">It seems that it will get better with medicine, but, even if surgery is necessary, it’s a simple procedure.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>もし<ruby><rb>泥棒</rb><rt>どろ ぼう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>はい</rt></ruby>られたとしたって、たいして<ruby><rb>金目</rb><rt>かね め</rt></ruby>になるものはない。</span>／<span class="translation">Even if a burglar breaks in, there is nothing of monetary value.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>もし<ruby><rb>入社</rb><rt>にゅう しゃ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>試験</rb><rt>し けん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>合格</rb><rt>ごう かく</rt></ruby>しても、<ruby><rb>本人</rb><rt>ほん にん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>入社</rb><rt>にゅう しゃ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>意志</rb><rt>い し</rt></ruby>がないのなら<ruby><rb>辞退</rb><rt>じ たい</rt></ruby>すべきだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Even if one passes the company entrance test, if the person has no intention of joining the company, he or she ought to turn the offer down.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used with conditional clauses such as ても, としても, and としたって, expresses the meaning “even if such a situation should come into being.” Often carries the implication that “there is little possibility, but....” Generally かりに can be used in its place.</div></body></html>