<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>みたいだ</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0960.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【みせる】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0962.xhtml">【みだりに】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x92832">【みたいだ】</h1><h4 class="info">［N／Na／A／V　みたいだ］</h4><div class="explanation">A casual expression mainly used in speaking. In formal sentences or situations ようだ is used more commonly. It is unusual to replace ようだ in idiomatic expressions with みたいだ. </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x92849"><span class="number">1. </span>...みたい〈simile〉</h2><div class="explanation">Used to show a condition, nature, form, or behavior of things by giving something similar as an example. It is the same as よう. まるで／ちょうど...みたい can be used to emphasize extreme similarity. As あたかも, いかにも, and さながら are formal written expressions, they cannot be used with みたい.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x92862"><span class="number">a. </span>NみたいなN</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>この<ruby><rb>薬</rb><rt>くすり</rt></ruby>は、チョコレートみたいな<ruby><rb>味</rb><rt>あじ</rt></ruby>がする。</span>／<span class="translation">This medicine tastes like chocolate.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>竹</rb><rt>たけ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>下</rb><rt>した</rt></ruby>さんって、あの<ruby><rb>学生</rb><rt>がく せい</rt></ruby>みたいな<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>でしょ？</span>／<span class="translation">Takeshita-san is that guy who looks like a student, right?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>いい<ruby><rb>年</rb><rt>とし</rt></ruby>をして、<ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>みたいな<ruby><rb>服</rb><rt>ふく</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>着</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>ないでほしいな。</span>／<span class="translation">At your age, I wish you wouldn’t wear such childish clothes. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>飛行機</rb><rt>ひ こう き</rt></ruby>みたいな<ruby><rb>形</rb><rt>かたち</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>雲</rb><rt>くも</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>浮</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>かんでいる。</span>／<span class="translation">There’s a cloud there that looks like an airplane.</span></div><div class="explanation">When used in the form N1みたいなN2, N2 is described by giving an example of something (N1) to which it bears some resemblance. </div><div class="explanation">Can be rephrased using N1のようなN2. Not to be confused with NらしいN, where N1=N2. N1みたいなN2 only gives something which resembles N2 as an example and so N2 is not actually the thing denoted by N1. For example, 男みたいな人 means that the person appears like a man but, in reality, is not a man. In contrast to this, 男らしい人 means that the person is very manly, or that masculine characteristics are prominent in that person, and it is used in reference to males.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x92909"><span class="number">b. </span>...みたいだ</h3><h4 class="info">［N／V　みたいだ］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>すごい<ruby><rb>風</rb><rt>かぜ</rt></ruby>だ。まるで<ruby><rb>台風</rb><rt>たい ふう</rt></ruby>みたいだ。</span>／<span class="translation">What a wind! It’s just like a typhoon.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>君</rb><rt>きみ</rt></ruby>ってまるで<ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>みたいだね。</span>／<span class="translation">You’re just like a child.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>その<ruby><rb>地方</rb><rt>ち ほう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>方言</rb><rt>ほう げん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>慣</rb><rt>な</rt></ruby>れるまでは、まるで<ruby><rb>外国語</rb><rt>がい こく ご</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>聞</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>いているみたいだった。</span>／<span class="translation">Until I got used to the dialect of that area, it was just like listening to a foreign language.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>合格</rb><rt>ごう かく</rt></ruby>するなんてうそみたい。</span>／<span class="translation">That I have passed (the exam) seems unbelievable.</span></div><div class="explanation">What the speaker felt about the condition, nature, form, or behavior of things is expressed by giving an easy-to-comprehend example of something which bears some resemblance to them. It can be replaced with ...ようだ. Many women omit the sentence-final だ in everyday conversation, as in example (4). うそみたいだ means “(it’s) unbelievable” or “(I’m) very surprised.”</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x92948"><span class="number">c. </span>...みたいに</h3><h4 class="info">［N／A／V　みたいに］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>もう9<ruby><rb>月</rb><rt>がつ</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>半</rb><rt>なか</rt></ruby>ばなのに、<ruby><rb>真夏</rb><rt>ま なつ</rt></ruby>みたいに<ruby><rb>暑</rb><rt>あつ</rt></ruby>い。</span>／<span class="translation">Even though it’s the middle of September, it’s hot like midsummer.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>この<ruby><rb>服</rb><rt>ふく</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>って<ruby><rb>何年</rb><rt>なん ねん</rt></ruby>にもなるが、<ruby><rb>新品</rb><rt>しん ぴん</rt></ruby>みたいにきれいだ。</span>／<span class="translation">It’s many years since I bought these clothes, but they look as good as new.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>みたいにすねるのはやめろよ。</span>／<span class="translation">Stop sulking like a child. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>こんなにうまいコーヒーが、<ruby><rb>一杯</rb><rt>いっ ぱい</rt></ruby> 100 <ruby><rb>円</rb><rt>えん</rt></ruby>だなんて、ただみたいに<ruby><rb>安</rb><rt>やす</rt></ruby>いね。</span>／<span class="translation">Having coffee this good for only 100 yen a cup—it’s so cheap it seems free.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>ばかりが<ruby><rb>悪</rb><rt>わる</rt></ruby>いみたいに<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>わないでよ。あなただって<ruby><rb>悪</rb><rt>わる</rt></ruby>いんだから。</span>／<span class="translation">Don’t speak as if only I was bad! You were bad, too!</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>学校</rb><rt>がっ こう</rt></ruby>ではあまり<ruby><rb>会</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>わないね。</span>／<span class="translation">We don’t see you much at school.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>おいおい、そんな<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>かた</rt></ruby>をしたら、<ruby><rb>僕</rb><rt>ぼく</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>授業</rb><rt>じゅ ぎょう</rt></ruby>をさぼってばかりいるみたいに<ruby><rb>聞</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>こえるじゃないか。</span>／<span class="translation">Hey, when you talk like that, it sounds like I’m always skipping classes.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to show the condition, nature, form, or behavior of things by giving something similar as an example. Examples (5) and (6) imply “even though (that) is not the case....”</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x93011"><span class="number">d. </span>...みたいなものだ</h3><h4 class="info">［Nみたいなものだ］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-たみたいなものだ］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>僕</rb><rt>ぼく</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>給料</rb><rt>きゅう りょう</rt></ruby>なんか、<ruby><rb>会社</rb><rt>かい しゃ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>儲</rb><rt>もう</rt></ruby>けに<ruby><rb>比</rb><rt>くら</rt></ruby>べたら、ただみたいなものさ。</span>／<span class="translation">When it comes to my salary, compared to the company’s profits, it’s like I’m working for free.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>《<ruby><rb>野球</rb><rt>や きゅう</rt></ruby>をみながら》こんなに<ruby><rb>点差</rb><rt>てん さ</rt></ruby>があけば、もう<ruby><rb>勝</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>ったみたいなものだ。</span>／<span class="translation">《while watching baseball》With this kind of point spread, it’s like they’ve already won.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>中田</rb><rt>なか た</rt></ruby>さん、<ruby><rb>店</rb><rt>みせ</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>売</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>ったんだって？</span>／<span class="translation">Is it true that Nakata-san sold his shop?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span><ruby><rb>売</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>ったというか、まあ、<ruby><rb>取</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>られたみたいなものだ。<ruby><rb>借金</rb><rt>しゃっ きん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>抵当</rb><rt>てい とう</rt></ruby>にはいってたんだそうだよ。</span>／<span class="translation">Sold? Well, more like it was taken. Apparently it was used as collateral against a loan. </span></div><div class="explanation">Means “(it) has still not actually happened but (it) is almost sure to” or “the situation is almost the same as....” In speech, もんだ is often used in place of ものだ.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x93061"><span class="number">2. </span>...みたいだ〈supposition, conjecture〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>誰</rb><rt>だれ</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>本名</rb><rt>ほん みょう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>らないみたいだ。</span>／<span class="translation">It seems that nobody knows her real name.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>田中</rb><rt>た なか</rt></ruby>さんは<ruby><rb>甘</rb><rt>あま</rt></ruby>いものが<ruby><rb>嫌</rb><rt>きら</rt></ruby>いみたいだ。</span>／<span class="translation">It seems that Tanaka-san dislikes sweet things.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>どうもかぜをひいたみたいだ。</span>／<span class="translation">I might have caught a cold.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>今度</rb><rt>こん ど</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>発売</rb><rt>はつ ばい</rt></ruby>された<ruby><rb>辞書</rb><rt>じ しょ</rt></ruby>は、すごくいいみたいだよ。</span>／<span class="translation">The dictionary being launched now seems really good.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なに</rt></ruby>か<ruby><rb>焦</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>げているみたいだ。へんな<ruby><rb>匂</rb><rt>にお</rt></ruby>いがする。</span>／<span class="translation">Something seems to be burning. There is a strange smell.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><span class="number">A:</span>あの<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>誰</rb><rt>だれ</rt></ruby>？</span>／<span class="translation">Who is that?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span><ruby><rb>誰</rb><rt>だれ</rt></ruby>だろう。<ruby><rb>近所</rb><rt>きん じょ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>じゃないみたいだね。</span>／<span class="translation">Hmm, I wonder. He doesn’t look like someone from around here.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（7）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>試験</rb><rt>し けん</rt></ruby>はいつあるんだい。</span>／<span class="translation">When’s your exam?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span><ruby><rb>来週</rb><rt>らい しゅう</rt></ruby>みたいだよ。</span>／<span class="translation">It looks like next week.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（8）</span><span class="number">A:</span>あの<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>会社</rb><rt>かい しゃ</rt></ruby>をやめたの？</span>／<span class="translation">Has that person quit the company?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>みたいだね。</span>／<span class="translation">It would seem so.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（9）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>小林</rb><rt>こ ばやし</rt></ruby>さんはもうアメリカに<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ったのかな？</span>／<span class="translation">Kobayashi-san has already gone to America, hasn’t she? </span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>ええ、きのう<ruby><rb>出発</rb><rt>しゅっ ぱつ</rt></ruby>したみたいですよ。</span>／<span class="translation">Yeah, it seems she left yesterday.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（10）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>山本</rb><rt>やま もと</rt></ruby>さん<ruby><rb>怒</rb><rt>おこ</rt></ruby>っていたでしょう？</span>／<span class="translation">Yamamoto-san was angry, wasn’t he?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>うん、すごく<ruby><rb>怒</rb><rt>おこ</rt></ruby>ってるみたいだった。</span>／<span class="translation">Yeah, he seemed very angry.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（11）</span>そのときの<ruby><rb>佐々木</rb><rt>さ さ き</rt></ruby>さんはなんだか<ruby><rb>怖</rb><rt>こわ</rt></ruby>くて、いつもの<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>ではないみたいだった。</span>／<span class="translation">Sasaki-san was kind of scary at that time. He didn’t seem like his usual self.</span></div><div class="explanation">Shows the speaker’s supposition. Means “(I) can’t be certain but (I) think it is so.”  Expresses the speaker’s inference based on what they themselves have experienced, something they have seen, heard, or sensed. </div><div class="explanation">In contrast to this, when expressing a supposition based on information gained indirectly, such as something heard from another person, らしい is used. When reporting something as it was heard from another, そうだ is used.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>山下さんは今日は来ないみたいですね（もう、時間も遅いし）。／It looks like Yamashita-san is not coming today (because the time is already late).</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>山下さんは今日は来ないらしいですよ（直接きいたわけではないが、他の人がそう言っていた）。／It looks like Yamashita-san is not coming today (I haven’t heard this directly but somebody else was saying so).</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>山下さんは今日は来ないそうです（山下さんから「行かない」という伝言があった）。／It looks like Yamashita-san is not coming today (I had a message from Yamashita-san saying she is not coming).</div><div class="explanation">...みたいだ and ...みたいだった are both often used, but their meanings are different. As in the next example, V-たみたいだ concerns a thing which occurred in the past and shows the inferred outcome at the time of speaking.</div><div class="explanation xtalk"><span class="type">（例）</span><span class="number">A:</span>田中さんはいつ来たのかな？／I wonder when Tanaka-san arrived.</div><div class="explanation xtalk"><span class="type"></span><span class="number">B:</span>午前中は見かけなかったから、昼から来たみたいですよ。／I didn’t see him this morning and so he must have come after noon.</div><div class="explanation">V-たみたいだった shows that the speaker thought something to be the case at a certain point in the past.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>昨日の夜は妙だった。誰か来たみたいだったから、ドアをあけてみたが、だれもいなかった。そんなことが何度もあった。／Last night was strange. Because I thought someone had come, I opened the door, but there was nobody there. That kind of thing has happened many times.</div><div class="explanation">Also, when describing a situation as it is seen, for example, when there is a cake before your eyes, このケーキはおいしいみたいだ is not used. In such a case このケーキはおいしそうだ is used.</div><div class="explanation xtalk"><span class="type">（例）</span><span class="number">A:</span>これ、新しく買ったスマートフォンです。／This is my new smartphone.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>B：便利そうですね。／B：It looks handy.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>B：便利みたいですね。／B：It looks handy.</div><div class="explanation">The そう that is used in such cases is different from the そう used to express hearsay and so care must be taken. When expressing hearsay we use おいしいそうだ(they say it is tasty) and 便利だそうだ (they say it is handy/convenient).</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x93341"><span class="number">3. </span>...みたい〈example〉</h2><h4 class="info">［NみたいなN］</h4><h4 class="info">［Nみたいに］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>東京</rb><rt>とう きょう</rt></ruby>や<ruby><rb>大阪</rb><rt>おお さか</rt></ruby>みたいな<ruby><rb>大都会</rb><rt>だい と かい</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>住</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>みたくない。</span>／<span class="translation">I don’t want to live in a big city like Tokyo or Osaka.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>三分</rb><rt>さんぷん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>間</rb><rt>かん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>写真</rb><rt>しゃ しん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>機械</rb><rt>き かい</rt></ruby>って、どんなところにある？</span>／<span class="translation">What kind of place will have an instant photo booth?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>さあ、デパートみたいなところにはあるんじゃないかな。</span>／<span class="translation">Well, won’t they have them in places like department stores?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なに</rt></ruby>か<ruby><rb>細</rb><rt>ほそ</rt></ruby>くて<ruby><rb>長</rb><rt>なが</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>棒</rb><rt>ぼう</rt></ruby>みたいな<ruby><rb>物</rb><rt>もの</rt></ruby>はありませんか。</span>／<span class="translation">Do you have something long and thin like a pole?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>佐藤</rb><rt>さ とう</rt></ruby>さんみたいに<ruby><rb>英語</rb><rt>えい ご</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>上手</rb><rt>じょう ず</rt></ruby>になりたい。</span>／<span class="translation">I want to become good at English like Sato-san.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>今年</rb><rt>ことし</rt></ruby>みたいに<ruby><rb>暑</rb><rt>あつ</rt></ruby>いと、<ruby><rb>働</rb><rt>はたら</rt></ruby>くのが<ruby><rb>本当</rb><rt>ほん  とう</rt></ruby>にいやになる。</span>／<span class="translation">When it’s as hot as this year, work really becomes a pain.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>君</rb><rt>きみ</rt></ruby>みたいなあわて<ruby><rb>者</rb><rt>もの</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>たことがないよ。</span>／<span class="translation">I’ve never seen anyone as discombobulated as you.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（7）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>みたいに<ruby><rb>勝手</rb><rt>かっ て</rt></ruby>なことばかりしていると、そのうち<ruby><rb>誰</rb><rt>だれ</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>相手</rb><rt>あい て</rt></ruby>にしなくなる。</span>／<span class="translation">If he keeps on doing selfish things like he is now, eventually nobody will want to have anything to do with him.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to give examples. Example (1) means “big cities such as Tokyo and Osaka, for example,” while (2) means “large shops like department stores, for example.”</div><div class="explanation">Examples (5), (6), and (7) take the form of exemplifications but, in reality, they can be thought to mean the same as “because this summer was really hot, I didn’t like to work,” “you really are disorganized,” and “because he always does selfish things, eventually nobody will want anything to do with him.” In polite speech ...のような／ように is used.</div></body></html>