<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>いささか</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0040.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【いご】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0042.xhtml">【いざしらず】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x4359">【いささか】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x4361"><span class="number">1. </span>いささか</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>今回</rb><rt>こん かい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>試験</rb><rt>し けん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>前回</rb><rt>ぜん かい</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>比</rb><rt>くら</rt></ruby>べていささか<ruby><rb>難解</rb><rt>なん かい</rt></ruby>すぎたように<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>う。</span>／<span class="translation">I thought the exam this time was a bit too difficult compared to the last one. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>みんなが<ruby><rb>自分勝手</rb><rt>じ ぶん かっ て</rt></ruby>なことばかり<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>うので、いささか<ruby><rb>頭</rb><rt>あたま</rt></ruby>にきている。</span>／<span class="translation">I’m getting a little peeved at everyone only saying such self-centered things.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>この<ruby><rb>部屋</rb><rt>へ や</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>事務所</rb><rt>じ む しょ</rt></ruby>にするにはいささか<ruby><rb>狭</rb><rt>せま</rt></ruby>すぎるのではないか。</span>／<span class="translation">I wonder if this room is a little too small for an office.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “a little” or “somewhat.” It can also be used as an indirect, euphemistic way to say かなり(considerably) or 相当(quite). </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x4392"><span class="number">2. </span>いささかも...ない</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>今回</rb><rt>こん かい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>事件</rb><rt>じ けん</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>はいささかも<ruby><rb>関係</rb><rt>かん けい</rt></ruby>ございません。</span>／<span class="translation">I have absolutely nothing to do with this incident. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>突然</rb><rt>とつ ぜん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>らせにも<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>はいささかも<ruby><rb>動</rb><rt>どう</rt></ruby>じなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">He was completely unfazed by the unexpected news.  </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>自分</rb><rt>じ ぶん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>反対</rb><rt>はん たい</rt></ruby>する<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>対</rb><rt>たい</rt></ruby>してはいささかも<ruby><rb>容赦</rb><rt>よう しゃ</rt></ruby>しないので、みんなから<ruby><rb>恐</rb><rt>おそ</rt></ruby>れられている。</span>／<span class="translation">She never forgives anyone who opposes her, so everyone is afraid of her.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “there is not... at all.”</div></body></html>