<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>にかわって</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0763.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【にかまけて】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0765.xhtml">【にかわり】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x70689">【にかわって】</h1><h4 class="info">［Nにかわって］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>母</rb><rt>はは</rt></ruby>にかわって、<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>があいさつします。</span>／<span class="translation">I’ll make a greeting on behalf of my mother. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>急病</rb><rt>きゅう びょう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>母</rb><rt>はは</rt></ruby>にかわって、<ruby><rb>父</rb><rt>ちち</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>出席</rb><rt>しゅっ せき</rt></ruby>した。</span>／<span class="translation">My father went in place of my mother, who was stricken with a sudden sickness.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>本日</rb><rt>ほん じつ</rt></ruby>ご<ruby><rb>出席</rb><rt>しゅっ せき</rt></ruby>いただけなかった<ruby><rb>山田</rb><rt>やま だ</rt></ruby>さんに<ruby><rb>代</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>わって、ご<ruby><rb>家族</rb><rt>か ぞく</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>かた</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>賞状</rb><rt>しょう じょう</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>副賞</rb><rt>ふく しょう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>受</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>け<ruby><rb>取</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>っていただきます。</span>／<span class="translation">On behalf of Yamada-san, who could not be here today, I would like a member of her family to receive a certificate of accomplishment and a supplementary prize.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>21<ruby><rb>世紀</rb><rt>せい き</rt></ruby>には、これまでの<ruby><rb>先進</rb><rt>せんしん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>諸国</rb><rt>しょ こく</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>代</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>わって、アジア<ruby><rb>諸国</rb><rt>しょ こく</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>世界</rb><rt>せ かい</rt></ruby>をリードするようになるのではないだろうか。</span>／<span class="translation">Isn’t it the case that in the 21st century, Asian countries will take the lead in the world instead of those advanced countries that have led until now?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>山田</rb><rt>やま だ</rt></ruby>さんが<ruby><rb>立候補</rb><rt>りっ こう ほ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>辞退</rb><rt>じ たい</rt></ruby>するとなると、<ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>代</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>わる<ruby><rb>実力者</rb><rt>じつ りょく しゃ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>立</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>てなければならない。</span>／<span class="translation">If Yamada-san withdraws as a candidate, we have to recommend another capable person in her place.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses the meaning that someone takes action on behalf of the person who was to have done so. When it modifies a noun, becomes NにかわるN. Can be rephrased as ...のかわりに．</div></body></html>