<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>かい</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0108.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【が<sub class="variation">2</sub>】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0110.xhtml">【かえって】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x10159">【かい】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x10161"><span class="number">1. </span>かいが　ある／ない</h2><h4 class="info">［Nのかいが　ある／ない］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-たかいが　ある／ない］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>努力</rb><rt>ど りょく</rt></ruby>したかい（が）あって、<ruby><rb>無事</rb><rt>ぶ じ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>合格</rb><rt>ごう かく</rt></ruby>することができた。</span>／<span class="translation">As a result of all the effort I put in, I was able to pass the exam.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>コンクールで<ruby><rb>優勝</rb><rt>ゆう しょう</rt></ruby>できるなんて、<ruby><rb>一日</rb><rt>いち にち</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>休</rb><rt>やす</rt></ruby>まず<ruby><rb>練習</rb><rt>れん しゅう</rt></ruby>したかいがあったね。</span>／<span class="translation">The fact that we won the competition shows that practicing every single day was worth it.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>警官</rb><rt>けい かん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>懸命</rb><rt>けん めい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>説得</rb><rt>せっ とく</rt></ruby>のかいもなく、その<ruby><rb>男性</rb><rt>だん せい</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>警官</rb><rt>けい かん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>顔</rb><rt>かお</rt></ruby>をしばらくじっと<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>つめた<ruby><rb>後</rb><rt>あと</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>屋上</rb><rt>おく じょう</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>飛</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>び<ruby><rb>降</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>りてしまったという。</span>／<span class="translation">All the policeman’s earnest persuasion was to no avail. They say the man stared at him for a while and then jumped off the roof.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>になってまったく<ruby><rb>違</rb><rt>ちが</rt></ruby>う<ruby><rb>意見</rb><rt>い けん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>主張</rb><rt>しゅ ちょう</rt></ruby>されたのでは、せっかくみんなが<ruby><rb>歩</rb><rt>あゆ</rt></ruby>み<ruby><rb>寄</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>って<ruby><rb>意見</rb><rt>い けん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>調整</rb><rt>ちょう せい</rt></ruby>したかいがなくなるじゃないか。</span>／<span class="translation">If you’re going to assert a completely different opinion now, it will mean the trouble everyone took to make concessions and coordinate their opinions was really all for nothing.</span></div><div class="explanation">Follows a verb or noun expressing an action and indicates that the action has been rewarded or the anticipated effect of the action has been achieved. When the negative form is used, it means that there was no reward despite the effort, or no result from the action.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x10202"><span class="number">2. </span>R-がい</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>やりがいのある<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>求</rb><rt>もと</rt></ruby>めて<ruby><rb>転職</rb><rt>てん しょく</rt></ruby>する。</span>／<span class="translation">I want to find some work with a purpose, so I am changing jobs.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>のほかに<ruby><rb>生</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>きがいを<ruby><rb>見出</rb><rt>み いだ</rt></ruby>せないような<ruby><rb>人生</rb><rt>じん せい</rt></ruby>ではあまりにも<ruby><rb>寂</rb><rt>さび</rt></ruby>しいではないか。</span>／<span class="translation">If you can’t find a reason to live other than your work, it is so sad, isn’t it.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>もっと<ruby><rb>働</rb><rt>はたら</rt></ruby>きがいのある<ruby><rb>職場</rb><rt>しょく ば</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>移</rb><rt>うつ</rt></ruby>りたいと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>うが、この<ruby><rb>不況</rb><rt>ふ きょう</rt></ruby>では<ruby><rb>転職</rb><rt>てん しょく</rt></ruby>もなかなかむずかしそうだ。</span>／<span class="translation">I’d like to move to a workplace with a more rewarding job, but it seems pretty difficult to change jobs in this recession.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>こんなに<ruby><rb>喜</rb><rt>よろこ</rt></ruby>んでもらえるのだったら、<ruby><rb>料理</rb><rt>りょう り</rt></ruby>のしがいがある。</span>／<span class="translation">If it makes you this happy, then cooking is worth it.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>一度</rb><rt>いち ど</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>失</rb><rt>うしな</rt></ruby>われた<ruby><rb>森林</rb><rt>しん りん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>元</rb><rt>もと</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>戻</rb><rt>もど</rt></ruby>すのは<ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>たい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>変</rb><rt>へん</rt></ruby>なことではあるが、そこに<ruby><rb>住</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>む<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>たちの<ruby><rb>暮</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>らしもかかっているだけに、<ruby><rb>苦労</rb><rt>く ろう</rt></ruby>のしがいもあるというものだ。</span>／<span class="translation">It is hard to restore forestland once lost, but the people living there depend on it for their livelihoods, so it is well worth the trouble.</span></div><div class="explanation">Attaches to a verb stem and means that an action has value or is effective or rewarding. It is used with only a limited range of verbs. When the action is difficult to accomplish or requires great effort, as in (4) and (5), it indicates that the effort is worthwhile and meaningful.</div></body></html>