<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>がる</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0171.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【かりにも】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0173.xhtml">【かれ】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x13932">【がる】</h1><h4 class="info">［Na がる］</h4><h4 class="info">［A-がる］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-たがる］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>注射</rb><rt>ちゅう しゃ</rt></ruby>をいやがるこどもは<ruby><rb>多</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>い。</span>／<span class="translation">Many children hate injections.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>その<ruby><rb>子</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>自分</rb><rt>じ ぶん</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>同</rb><rt>おな</rt></ruby>じくらいの<ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>きさの<ruby><rb>犬</rb><rt>いぬ</rt></ruby>をかわいがっている。</span>／<span class="translation">The girl loves the dog, which is almost her size.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>妻</rb><rt>つま</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>死</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>をいつまでもかなしがってばかりはいられない。わたしには<ruby><rb>残</rb><rt>のこ</rt></ruby>されたこどもたちをそだてていく<ruby><rb>義務</rb><rt>ぎ む</rt></ruby>がある。</span>／<span class="translation">It is not good for me to do nothing but grieve over the death of my wife. I have a duty to bring up the children she left me.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>こわがらなくてもいいのよ。この<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>はおかあさんのともだちなの。</span>／<span class="translation">You don’t need to be scared. She is a friend of my mother’s.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>そのラーメン<ruby><rb>屋</rb><rt>や</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>朝</rb><rt>あさ</rt></ruby>8<ruby><rb>時</rb><rt>じ</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>夜</rb><rt>よる</rt></ruby>の2<ruby><rb>時</rb><rt>じ</rt></ruby>までやっているうえに<ruby><rb>安</rb><rt>やす</rt></ruby>くてうまいので、<ruby><rb>近所</rb><rt>きん じょ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>学生</rb><rt>がく せい</rt></ruby>たちに<ruby><rb>重宝</rb><rt>ちょう ほう</rt></ruby>がられていた。</span>／<span class="translation">That Chinese noodle soup shop is open from eight in the morning to two in the following morning, and what’s more, they serve cheap and tasty noodles, so it’s really prized by students in the neighborhood.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span>こどもがおもちゃをほしがって<ruby><rb>地</rb><rt>じ</rt></ruby>べたにすわりこんで<ruby><rb>泣</rb><rt>な</rt></ruby>いていた。</span>／<span class="translation">The child wanted the toy and plopped down on the floor in tears.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（7）</span><ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はなし</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>最後</rb><rt>さい ご</rt></ruby>まで<ruby><rb>聞</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>かずに<ruby><rb>口</rb><rt>くち</rt></ruby>をはさみたがる<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>がときどきいる。</span>／<span class="translation">There are some people who love to butt in without listening to the end of a story.</span></div><div class="explanation">Attaches to adjectives or stems of the V-たい form, which expresses desire. Means thinking, feeling, or acting a certain way. This pattern is used with verbs that describe a situation objectively, so it usually isn’t used in the first person, except in the narrative passages of a novel or in cases like (3) where one looks at oneself objectively. が in 本が読みたい and 車がほしい is changed toを, as in 本を読みたがる and 車をほしがる. In addition to the examples above, はずかしがる, さびしがる, なつかしがる, けむたがる, つよがる, いたがる and とくいがる are often used. </div><div class="explanation">Variations such as たがり or あつがり, さむがり, さびしがり, はずかしがり and こわがり are nouns that refer to people who think, feel, or act in such-and-such a way.</div></body></html>