<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ことになる</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0229.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ことになっている】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0231.xhtml">【ことには】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x18094">【ことになる】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x18099"><span class="number">1. </span>...ことになる〈decision〉</h2><h4 class="info">［Nということになる］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-る　（という）ことになる］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-ない　（という）ことになる］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>こんど<ruby><rb>大阪</rb><rt>おお さか</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>支社</rb><rt>し しゃ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>くことになりました。</span>／<span class="translation">It’s been decided that I am to go to the Osaka branch office. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>ふたりでよく<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はな</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>合</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>った<ruby><rb>結果</rb><rt>けっ か</rt></ruby>、やはり<ruby><rb>離婚</rb><rt>り こん</rt></ruby>するのが<ruby><rb>一番</rb><rt>いち ばん</rt></ruby>いいということになりました。</span>／<span class="translation">After a long discussion between the two of us, we came to the conclusion that, as we had suspected, divorce was the best solution. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>よく<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はな</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>合</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>った<ruby><rb>結果</rb><rt>けっ か</rt></ruby>、やはり<ruby><rb>離婚</rb><rt>り こん</rt></ruby>ということになりました。</span>／<span class="translation">After a long discussion, the decision, as expected, was to divorce.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>亡</rb><rt>な</rt></ruby>くなった<ruby><rb>山田</rb><rt>やま だ</rt></ruby>さんは<ruby><rb>形式</rb><rt>けい しき</rt></ruby>ばったことがきらいな<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>だったから、<ruby><rb>葬式</rb><rt>そう しき</rt></ruby>などはしないことになりそうだな。</span>／<span class="translation">As the late Yamada-san was a person who disliked ceremony, it looks like that there won’t be a funeral or anything. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>この<ruby><rb>問題</rb><rt>もん だい</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>細部</rb><rt>さい ぶ</rt></ruby>については<ruby><rb>両政府</rb><rt>りょう せい ふ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>次官級</rb><rt>じ かん きゅう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>協議</rb><rt>きょう ぎ</rt></ruby>にゆだねられることになった。</span>／<span class="translation">Regarding this issue, it was decided that the details were to be left to vice-minister level consultations between the two governments.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means that some kind of decision or agreement was made concerning a future action, and a certain result will follow. In contrast to ...ことにする, which specifies who made the decision or resolution, ことになるconveys the meaning that the conclusion or result in question will be obtained naturally, unintentionally, and of its own accord. Often used in the <i>ta</i>-form ことになった, as in (1), (2), and (4). こととなる, which has the same meaning, is a more formal expression used in written language.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x18154"><span class="number">2. </span>...ことになる〈restatement〉</h2><h4 class="info">［Nということになる］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-る　（という）ことになる］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-ない　（という）ことになる］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>4<ruby><rb>年</rb><rt>ねん</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>留学</rb><rt>りゅう がく</rt></ruby>するの？　じゃあ、あの<ruby><rb>会社</rb><rt>かい しゃ</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>就職</rb><rt>しゅう しょく</rt></ruby>しないことになるの？</span>／<span class="translation">You’re going to study abroad for four years? So, you’re not going to get a job at that company after all?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>りえさんはわたしの<ruby><rb>母</rb><rt>はは</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>妹</rb><rt>いもうと</rt></ruby>のこどもだから、わたしとりえさんはいとこどうしということになる。</span>／<span class="translation">Rie-san is the child of my mother’s sister, so that makes Rie-san and me cousins.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>これまで 10 <ruby><rb>年</rb><rt>ねん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>前</rb><rt>まえ</rt></ruby>と4<ruby><rb>年前</rb><rt>ねん まえ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>開</rb><rt>ひら</rt></ruby>いているので、これで<ruby><rb>日本</rb><rt>に ほん</rt></ruby>での<ruby><rb>開催</rb><rt>かい さい</rt></ruby>は3<ruby><rb>回目</rb><rt>かい め</rt></ruby>ということになる。</span>／<span class="translation">It was held here ten years ago and four years ago, so that makes this the third time for it to be held in Japan. </span></div><div class="explanation">Used to paraphrase, to look at something from a different perspective, or to point out the true nature of something. </div></body></html>