<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>いくら</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0037.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【いかん】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0039.xhtml">【いけない】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x3923">【いくら】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x3925"><span class="number">1. </span>いくら</h2><h3 class="subsubtitle" id="idsubsubtitlex1x3931"><span class="number">a. </span>いくら〈question〉</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>この<ruby><rb>本</rb><rt>ほん</rt></ruby>はいくらですか。</span>／<span class="translation">How much is this book?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>東京</rb><rt>とう きょう</rt></ruby>まで<ruby><rb>片道</rb><rt>かた みち</rt></ruby>いくらですか。</span>／<span class="translation">How much is a one-way ticket to Tokyo?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>この<ruby><rb>絵</rb><rt>え</rt></ruby>はいくらぐらいかなあ。</span>／<span class="translation">I wonder how much this picture is.</span></div><div class="explanation">いくら expresses that a price is unknown. It is used for asking the price.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x3965"><span class="number">b. </span>いくら〈indefinite〉</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>いくらなら<ruby><rb>案内</rb><rt>あん ない</rt></ruby>してもらってもいいとこちらから<ruby><rb>先</rb><rt>さき</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>提示</rb><rt>てい じ</rt></ruby>した。</span>／<span class="translation">I told them beforehand how much I was prepared to pay for a guided tour.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>フリーマーケットに<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>だ</rt></ruby>す<ruby><rb>品物</rb><rt>しな もの</rt></ruby>は、それぞれいくらで<ruby><rb>売</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>るということを<ruby><rb>決</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>めてこの<ruby><rb>書類</rb><rt>しょ るい</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>金額</rb><rt>きん がく</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>書</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>込</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>んでください。</span>／<span class="translation">Please decide how much you want to charge for each item that you bring to the flea market, and fill in the amounts on this form.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>いくら<ruby><rb>持</rb><rt>も</rt></ruby>ってきてくれという<ruby><rb>形</rb><rt>かたち</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>注文</rb><rt>ちゅう もん</rt></ruby>しないと、<ruby><rb>後</rb><rt>あと</rt></ruby>でまた<ruby><rb>頼</rb><rt>たの</rt></ruby>まなければならなくなったりするから、<ruby><rb>個数</rb><rt>こ すう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>確認</rb><rt>かく にん</rt></ruby>してください。</span>／<span class="translation">If you don’t specify in your order how many items you want delivered, you may have to order more later on, so please confirm the number. </span></div><div class="explanation">In these cases, いくら indicates an indefinite price or amount. It is used when one is not able to say or it is not necessary to say an exact amount. </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x3996"><span class="number">2. </span>いくらでも</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>ビールならまだいくらでもあるから、<ruby><rb>安</rb><rt>あん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>心</rb><rt>しん</rt></ruby>して<ruby><rb>飲</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>んでください。</span>／<span class="translation">We still have plenty of beer, so please feel free to drink it. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>これだけ<ruby><rb>暇</rb><rt>ひま</rt></ruby>ならいくらでも<ruby><rb>好</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>きなことができる。</span>／<span class="translation">If I have this much free time, I can do whatever I’d like.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>あの<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>代</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>わりならいくらでもいるから、やめられても<ruby><rb>全然</rb><rt>ぜん ぜん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>困</rb><rt>こま</rt></ruby>らない。</span>／<span class="translation">It’s no problem whatsoever for me if that person quits, because I can find any number of people to take <span class="noSeparate">his/her</span> place.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>いくらでもいたいだけここにいてくれてかまわないよ。</span>／<span class="translation">I don’t mind if you stay here as long as you want.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses that something is unlimited and means “as much as one wishes.”</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x4033"><span class="number">3. </span>いくらも...ない</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>もうワインはいくらも<ruby><rb>残</rb><rt>のこ</rt></ruby>っていない。</span>／<span class="translation">There is not much wine left.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>バスがでるまで<ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby>はもういくらもない。</span>／<span class="translation">There is not much time left until the bus leaves. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>駅</rb><rt>えき</rt></ruby>までは<ruby><rb>歩</rb><rt>ある</rt></ruby>いていくらもかからなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">It didn’t take very much time to get to the station on foot.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>収入</rb><rt>しゅう にゅう</rt></ruby>はいくらにもならないが、やることに<ruby><rb>意味</rb><rt>い み</rt></ruby>がある。</span>／<span class="translation">Though I don’t get paid much for this, it is a worthwhile thing to do.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses that the amount is very small.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x4070"><span class="number">4. </span>いくら...ても</h2><h3 class="subsubtitle" id="idsubsubtitlex1x4073"><span class="number">a. </span>いくらV-ても</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>いくら<ruby><rb>練習</rb><rt>れん しゅう</rt></ruby>してもうまくならない。</span>／<span class="translation">I don’t get better however hard I practice.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>いくら<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べても<ruby><rb>太</rb><rt>ふと</rt></ruby>らない。</span>／<span class="translation">No matter how much I eat, I don’t put on weight.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>はいくら<ruby><rb>誘</rb><rt>さそ</rt></ruby>っても<ruby><rb>一度</rb><rt>いち ど</rt></ruby>もパーティーに<ruby><rb>顔</rb><rt>かお</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>だ</rt></ruby>してくれない。</span>／<span class="translation">He never shows up at a party no matter how many times I invite him.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>がいくら「お<ruby><rb>祝</rb><rt>いわ</rt></ruby>いにはバラの<ruby><rb>花束</rb><rt>はな たば</rt></ruby>をあげよう」と<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>っても、<ruby><rb>誰</rb><rt>だれ</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>賛成</rb><rt>さん せい</rt></ruby>してくれなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">No matter how many times I said we should give her a bouquet of roses to celebrate the occasion, no one would agree with me.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “no matter how many/how many times/how hard one does something.” Used for emphasizing degree or extent.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x4110"><span class="number">b. </span>いくら...といっても</h3><h4 class="info">［いくらNaだといっても］</h4><h4 class="info">［いくらA-いといっても］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>いくら<ruby><rb>給料</rb><rt>きゅう りょう</rt></ruby>がいいと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>っても、<ruby><rb>残業</rb><rt>ざん ぎょう</rt></ruby>がそんなに<ruby><rb>多</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>いのでは<ruby><rb>就職</rb><rt>しゅう しょく</rt></ruby>するのはいやだ。</span>／<span class="translation">However high the salary is, I don’t want to take the job if there is that much overtime work.  </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>いくら<ruby><rb>甘</rb><rt>あま</rt></ruby>いものが<ruby><rb>好</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>きだと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>っても、<ruby><rb>一度</rb><rt>いち ど</rt></ruby>におまんじゅうを3つは<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べられない。</span>／<span class="translation">However much I like sweets, I can’t eat three<i> manju</i><i>u</i>(bean-jam buns) at a sitting.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>いくらここの<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べ<ruby><rb>物</rb><rt>もの</rt></ruby>がまずいと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>っても、<ruby><rb>生協</rb><rt>せい きょう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>食堂</rb><rt>しょく どう</rt></ruby>よりはましだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">However bad the food here is, it would be better than a co-op restaurant.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “I acknowledge that..., but still” and is used to emphasize an assertion that follows. </div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x4150"><span class="number">c. </span>いくら...からといって（も）</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>いくら<ruby><rb>淋</rb><rt>さび</rt></ruby>しいからと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>って、<ruby><rb>夜中</rb><rt>よ なか</rt></ruby>の3<ruby><rb>時</rb><rt>じ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>友達</rb><rt>とも だち</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>電話</rb><rt>でん わ</rt></ruby>するなんて<ruby><rb>非常識</rb><rt>ひ じょう しき</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">Even if he feels lonely, calling a friend at three o’clock in the morning shows a lack of common sense.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>いくら<ruby><rb>体</rb><rt>からだ</rt></ruby>にいいからと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>っても、<ruby><rb>毎日</rb><rt>まい にち</rt></ruby>そればかり<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べ<ruby><rb>続</rb><rt>つづ</rt></ruby>けていては<ruby><rb>病気</rb><rt>びょう き</rt></ruby>になってしまう。</span>／<span class="translation">No matter how good it is for your health, you will get sick eating the same thing every day.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>いくら<ruby><rb>新</rb><rt>あたら</rt></ruby>しいのを<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>うからと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>っても、<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なに</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>古</rb><rt>ふる</rt></ruby>いのをすぐに<ruby><rb>捨</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>ててしまうことはないんじゃないか。</span>／<span class="translation">Even though you’re buying a new one, there isn’t any need to throw away the old one straight away, is there?</span></div><div class="explanation">Takes the pattern いくらXからといって（も）Y and means “you might think that X leads to the conclusion Y, but that is strange.” Implies a slight criticism and is followed by an objection against Y. In (1), for example, it is “not common sense” to do Y (calling a friend in the middle of the night) just because of X (being lonely).</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x4181"><span class="number">d. </span>いくら...からといっても</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>いくら<ruby><rb>才能</rb><rt>さい のう</rt></ruby>がないからと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>っても、10 <ruby><rb>年</rb><rt>ねん</rt></ruby>もピアノをやっていれば<ruby><rb>簡単</rb><rt>かん たん</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>伴奏</rb><rt>ばん そう</rt></ruby>ぐらいはできるだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">Although you say that he has no talent at all, if he has been playing the piano for ten years, he should at least be able to play a simple accompaniment.  </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>いくら<ruby><rb>不器用</rb><rt>ぶ き よう</rt></ruby>だからと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>っても、それだけきれいにセーターが<ruby><rb>編</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>めれば<ruby><rb>上出来</rb><rt>じょう で き</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">However clumsy you may say you are, knitting that beautiful sweater shows you are pretty good after all.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>いくら<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>料理</rb><rt>りょう り</rt></ruby>がうまいからと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>っても、プロとは<ruby><rb>違</rb><rt>ちが</rt></ruby>うんだからそういうこったものは<ruby><rb>作</rb><rt>つく</rt></ruby>れませんよ。</span>／<span class="translation">Even though I may be pretty good at cooking, I am not a professional, so I can’t make something as elaborate as that.</span></div><div class="explanation">Similar to Usage 4c above, with the difference that Y is not explicit. Means something likes “even if X, what follows is (not Y) but Z” and expresses the speaker’s refutation of Y. In (1), for example, the speaker is saying that even if X (“he has no talent for playing the piano”) is true, it doesn’t follow that “he can’t play the piano” (Y), but that “he should be able to play a simple accompaniment” (Z).</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x4212"><span class="number">e. </span>いくらなんでも</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>そういう<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>かた</rt></ruby>はいくらなんでもひどすぎるよ。</span>／<span class="translation">There’s no excuse for such a harsh statement.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>いくらなんでも、その<ruby><rb>服</rb><rt>ふく</rt></ruby>はお<ruby><rb>母</rb><rt>かあ</rt></ruby>さんには<ruby><rb>派手</rb><rt>は で</rt></ruby>すぎないか。</span>／<span class="translation">Be that as it may, don’t you think that outfit is too flashy for our mother?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>この<ruby><rb>料理</rb><rt>りょう り</rt></ruby>はいくらなんでも<ruby><rb>辛</rb><rt>から</rt></ruby>すぎてとても<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べられない。</span>／<span class="translation">I don’t care what you think, for me this food is so spicy that there’s no way I can eat it.</span></div><div class="explanation">An adverbial idiom often used with ...すぎる. Expresses a feeling of criticism, as in “even if I take various circumstances into consideration, it’s still wrong/unusual/beyond common sense.” </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x4243"><span class="number">5. </span>いくらV-たところで</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>いくらがんばってみたところで<ruby><rb>結果的</rb><rt>けっ か てき</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>同</rb><rt>おな</rt></ruby>じことだ。</span>／<span class="translation">No matter how hard you try, you’ll get the same result.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>いくら<ruby><rb>隠</rb><rt>かく</rt></ruby>してみたところで、もうみんなにはばれているんだから<ruby><rb>仕方</rb><rt>し かた</rt></ruby>がないよ。</span>／<span class="translation">Even if you try to hide the fact, there’s nothing you can do since everyone already knows about it.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>いくらいいドレスを<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>ったところで、どうせ<ruby><rb>着</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>ていくところがないんだから<ruby><rb>無駄</rb><rt>む だ</rt></ruby>になるだけだ。</span>／<span class="translation">There’s no point in buying such a great dress, since you have no place to wear it.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>いくら<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はな</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>合</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>ったところで、<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>らは<ruby><rb>自分</rb><rt>じ ぶん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>意見</rb><rt>い けん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>変</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>える<ruby><rb>気</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>はないんだから、<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はな</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>合</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>うだけ<ruby><rb>無駄</rb><rt>む だ</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">No matter how many times we discuss it, it’s a waste of time because they have no intention of changing their opinion.</span></div><div class="explanation">When いくらV-たところで is followed by phrases like同じだ, 仕方がない, or 無駄だ, it means “no matter how hard one tries to do something, the situation doesn’t change” or “it’s a waste to work so hard.” This is similar to いくら...ても in Usage 4a, but Usage 5 includes a feeling of resignation because the result of the action will be meaningless. This is used to give advice that “you should not do something because....”</div></body></html>