<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>にわたり</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0844.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【にわたって】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0846.xhtml">【ぬ】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x75158">【にわたり】</h1><h4 class="info">［Nにわたり］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はな</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>合</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>いは<ruby><rb>数回</rb><rt>すう かい</rt></ruby>にわたり、<ruby><rb>最終的</rb><rt>さい しゅう てき</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>和解</rb><rt>わ かい</rt></ruby>した。</span>／<span class="translation">There were a number of meetings, and eventually they settled their differences. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>研究</rb><rt>けん きゅう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>多岐</rb><rt>た き</rt></ruby>にわたり、その<ruby><rb>成果</rb><rt>せい か</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>世界中</rb><rt>せ かい じゅう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>学者</rb><rt>がく しゃ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>強</rb><rt>つよ</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>影響</rb><rt>えい きょう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>与</rb><rt>あた</rt></ruby>えた。</span>／<span class="translation">His research was extensive and the results had a strong influence on scholars all over the world. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>訪</rb><rt>おとず</rt></ruby>れた<ruby><rb>国</rb><rt>くに</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>実</rb><rt>じつ</rt></ruby>に 23 カ<ruby><rb>国</rb><rt>こく</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>渡</rb><rt>わた</rt></ruby>り、その<ruby><rb>旅</rb><rt>たび</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>記録</rb><rt>き ろく</rt></ruby>した<ruby><rb>写真集</rb><rt>しゃ しん しゅう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>普通</rb><rt>ふ つう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>人々</rb><rt>ひと びと</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>生活</rb><rt>せい かつ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>生</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>生</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>きと<ruby><rb>写</rb><rt>うつ</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>取</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>っていることで<ruby><rb>評判</rb><rt>ひょう ばん</rt></ruby>になっている。</span>／<span class="translation">She actually visited a total of 23 countries, and the collection of photographs she took to record her travels has been well-received for its vivid portrayal of the lives of ordinary people. </span></div><div class="explanation">Has the same meaning as にわたって. While にわたって often modifies a verb that comes right after it, にわたり is usually used at the end of a clause. Used in written language and/or formal style.</div></body></html>