<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>まったく</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0946.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【またもや】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0948.xhtml">【まで】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x90222">【まったく】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x90224"><span class="number">1. </span>まったく...ない</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>きのうのクラスはまったくおもしろくなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">Yesterday’s class was not at all interesting.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>家</rb><rt>いえ</rt></ruby>ではまったく<ruby><rb>勉強</rb><rt>べん きょう</rt></ruby>をしない。</span>／<span class="translation">He does not study at all at home.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>この<ruby><rb>一週間</rb><rt>いっ しゅう かん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>全</rb><rt>まった</rt></ruby>く<ruby><rb>雨</rb><rt>あめ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>降</rb><rt>ふ</rt></ruby>っていない。</span>／<span class="translation">It hasn’t rained at all this week.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>その<ruby><rb>選手</rb><rt>せん しゅ</rt></ruby>のフォームは<ruby><rb>全</rb><rt>まった</rt></ruby>く<ruby><rb>文句</rb><rt>もん く</rt></ruby>のつけようのない<ruby><rb>美</rb><rt>うつく</rt></ruby>しさだ。</span>／<span class="translation">The beauty of that player’s form cannot be criticized.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>そのバイオリニストのアルバムは、デビューアルバムとしては<ruby><rb>全</rb><rt>まった</rt></ruby>く<ruby><rb>申</rb><rt>もう</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>分</rb><rt>ぶん</rt></ruby>のない<ruby><rb>出来</rb><rt>で き</rt></ruby>である。</span>／<span class="translation">One cannot say anything bad about that violinist’s album as a debut album.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to emphasize the negative meaning. It is more formal than ぜんぜん, すこしも and ちっとも, etc. In order to intensify phrases such as 文句のつけようがない, 申し分のない, and 非の打ち所がない, etc., it is difficult to use any expression other than まったく. </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x90267"><span class="number">2. </span>まったく</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>これとこれはまったく<ruby><rb>同</rb><rt>おな</rt></ruby>じものです。</span>／<span class="translation">This and this are entirely the same.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>それとこれとはまったくちがう<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はなし</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">That and this are completely different conversations.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>まったくいやな<ruby><rb>雨</rb><rt>あめ</rt></ruby>だなあ。</span>／<span class="translation">This rain is so unpleasant.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>またお<ruby><rb>金</rb><rt>かね</rt></ruby>わすれたの？　まったくこまった<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>ね。</span>／<span class="translation">You forgot your money again?  You really are impossible.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><span class="number">A:</span>うっとうしい<ruby><rb>天気</rb><rt>てん き</rt></ruby>だね。</span>／<span class="translation">What miserable weather!</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>まったくだ。</span>／<span class="translation">You said it!</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span>きのうの<ruby><rb>演奏</rb><rt>えん そう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>全</rb><rt>まった</rt></ruby>くすばらしいものだった。</span>／<span class="translation">Yesterday’s performance was absolutely wonderful.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to emphasize the extent of something. In example (5) it is used to give strong affirmation in response to what the other person has said.  </div></body></html>