<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>にきまっている</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0768.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【にかんする】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0770.xhtml">【にくい】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x70841">【にきまっている】</h1><h4 class="info">［N／A／V　にきまっている］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>こんないたずらをするのはあいつにきまっている。</span>／<span class="translation">I’m sure he’s the guy who would pull such a stunt.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>きっと<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>参加</rb><rt>さん か</rt></ruby>したがるに<ruby><rb>決</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>まっている。</span>／<span class="translation">I bet that he wants to join in.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>そんなことを<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ったら<ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>気</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>悪</rb><rt>わる</rt></ruby>くするに<ruby><rb>決</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>まっているじゃないか。</span>／<span class="translation">If you say such a thing, isn’t it likely she’ll get really upset?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>田辺</rb><rt>た なべ</rt></ruby>さん、ちゃんと<ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby>にまにあったかしら。</span>／<span class="translation">I wonder if Tanabe-san arrived in time.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>30<ruby><rb>分</rb><rt>ぷん</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>遅</rb><rt>おそ</rt></ruby>く<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>ていったのだから、<ruby><rb>遅刻</rb><rt>ち こく</rt></ruby>したに<ruby><rb>決</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>まっているじゃないの。</span>／<span class="translation">She left thirty minutes late, so she must have arrived late.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses the speaker’s conviction that something must be the case. When the speaker asserts <span class="noSeparate">his/her</span> conviction contradicting the listener’s, にきまっている becomes に決まっているじゃない（か／の）. An expression in spoken Japanese.</div></body></html>