<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ことにしている</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0226.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ごとに】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0228.xhtml">【ことにする】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x17872">【ことにしている】</h1><h4 class="info">［Vことにしている］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>毎日</rb><rt>まい にち</rt></ruby>かならず<ruby><rb>日記</rb><rt>にっ き</rt></ruby>をつけることにしている。</span>／<span class="translation">I make it a rule to write in my diary every day without fail. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>夜</rb><rt>よる</rt></ruby>はコーヒーを<ruby><rb>飲</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>まないことにしているんです。</span>／<span class="translation">I don’t drink coffee at night. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>家族</rb><rt>か ぞく</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>家事</rb><rt>か じ</rt></ruby>はすべて<ruby><rb>分担</rb><rt>ぶん たん</rt></ruby>してやることにしているそうだ。</span>／<span class="translation">I hear that his family makes it a policy to divide up all the household tasks among themselves. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>運動</rb><rt>うん どう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>不足</rb><rt>ぶ そく</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>解消</rb><rt>かい しょう</rt></ruby>のため、<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>はこどもと<ruby><rb>公園</rb><rt>こう えん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>くとかならず<ruby><rb>鉄棒</rb><rt>てつ ぼう</rt></ruby>をやることにしている。</span>／<span class="translation">To deal with my lack of exercise, I make it a rule to exercise on the horizontal bar every time I go to the park with my children. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>ずいぶん<ruby><rb>前</rb><rt>まえ</rt></ruby>から、<ruby><rb>不正</rb><rt>ふ せい</rt></ruby>をおこなった<ruby><rb>場合</rb><rt>ば あい</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>失格</rb><rt>しっ かく</rt></ruby>ということにしています。</span>／<span class="translation">For a long time now, any case of misconduct has led to disqualification.</span></div><div class="explanation">Indicates that something has been made into a habit or rule, based on a certain decision. Can be considered to mean that the result of the decision or resolution made in the act of ことにする is now a regular habit. Therefore, the form ことにしている is not used to refer to customs or manners in general.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>日本人は、はしを使ってご飯を食べることにしています。／Japanese people have decided to use chopsticks to eat rice. </div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>日本人は、はしを使ってご飯を食べます。／Japanese people use chopsticks to eat rice. </div></body></html>