<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>や1</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part1011.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【もらう】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part1013.xhtml">【や<sub class="variation">2</sub>】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x100096">【や<sub class="variation">1</sub>】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x100099"><span class="number">1. </span>NやN</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>机</rb><rt>つくえ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>うえ</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>皿</rb><rt>さら</rt></ruby>や<ruby><rb>紙</rb><rt>かみ</rt></ruby>コップなどが<ruby><rb>置</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>いてあった。</span>／<span class="translation">Things like plates and paper cups had been placed on the table.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>バスは<ruby><rb>中学生</rb><rt>ちゅう がく せい</rt></ruby>や<ruby><rb>高校生</rb><rt>こう こう せい</rt></ruby>ですぐにいっぱいになった。</span>／<span class="translation">The bus was soon full of junior and senior high school students as well as others. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>その<ruby><rb>村</rb><rt>むら</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>米</rb><rt>こめ</rt></ruby>や<ruby><rb>野菜</rb><rt>や さい</rt></ruby>はあるが、<ruby><rb>肉</rb><rt>にく</rt></ruby>はなかなか<ruby><rb>手</rb><rt>て</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>はい</rt></ruby>らない。</span>／<span class="translation">In that village they have food such as rice and vegetables, but it is not easy to lay your hands on meat.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to list things. In cases where XとY is used, there are only X and Y. In cases where XやY is used, it implies that there are also things other than those two.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x100130"><span class="number">2. </span><ruby><rb>数</rb><rt>すう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>量</rb><rt>りょう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>詞</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>+や+<ruby><rb>数</rb><rt>すう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>量</rb><rt>りょう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>詞</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby></h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>うちの<ruby><rb>息子</rb><rt>むすこ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>一度</rb><rt>いち ど</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>外国</rb><rt>がい こく</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>かけると1<ruby><rb>ヶ月</rb><rt>か げつ</rt></ruby>や2<ruby><rb>ヶ月</rb><rt>か げつ</rt></ruby>はなんの<ruby><rb>連絡</rb><rt>れん らく</rt></ruby>もありません。</span>／<span class="translation">Once our son has gone abroad we hear nothing from him for a month or two.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>善人</rb><rt>ぜん にん</rt></ruby>だと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>われている<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>でも、<ruby><rb>悪</rb><rt>わる</rt></ruby>いことの<ruby><rb>一</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>つや<ruby><rb>二</rb><rt>ふた</rt></ruby>つはしているだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">Even those who are said to be good people probably do one or two bad things.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>ももうすぐ<ruby><rb>二十歳</rb><rt>は た ち</rt></ruby>なんだから、ボーイフレンドが<ruby><rb>一人</rb><rt>ひとり</rt></ruby>や<ruby><rb>二人</rb><rt>ふたり</rt></ruby>いてもおかしくない。</span>／<span class="translation">She will soon be twenty and so it isn’t unusual for her to have a boyfriend or two.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>気前</rb><rt>き まえ</rt></ruby>がいいから、5<ruby><rb>万</rb><rt>まん</rt></ruby>や10 <ruby><rb>万</rb><rt>まん</rt></ruby>なら<ruby><rb>理由</rb><rt>り ゆう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>聞</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>かずに<ruby><rb>貸</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>してくれる。</span>／<span class="translation">He is generous and so he will lend me 50,000 or 100,000 yen without asking the reason.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>狭</rb><rt>せま</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>部屋</rb><rt>へ や</rt></ruby>ですが、<ruby><rb>一晩</rb><rt>ひと ばん</rt></ruby>や<ruby><rb>二晩</rb><rt>ふた ばん</rt></ruby>ならがまんできるでしょう。</span>／<span class="translation">It’s a small room, but I hope you can put up with it for a night or two.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>給料</rb><rt>きゅう りょう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>安</rb><rt>やす</rt></ruby>いが、<ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>一人</rb><rt>ひとり</rt></ruby>や<ruby><rb>二人</rb><rt>ふたり</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>育</rb><rt>そだ</rt></ruby>てられる。</span>／<span class="translation">My salary is low but we can raise a child or two on it.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（7）</span><ruby><rb>国際化</rb><rt>こく さい か</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>時代</rb><rt>じ だい</rt></ruby>なのに<ruby><rb>外国語</rb><rt>がい こく ご</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>一</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>つや<ruby><rb>二</rb><rt>ふた</rt></ruby>つできないようでは<ruby><rb>困</rb><rt>こま</rt></ruby>ります。</span>／<span class="translation">It’s the age of internationalization, so not being able to speak a foreign language or two is a problem.</span></div><div class="explanation">Gives an approximate amount and expresses that it is not a considerable amount. Used with expressions such as 大丈夫だ, かまわない, and たいしたことはない. It is often used to say “one or two” (e.g. one or two people).</div></body></html>