<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>たら1</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0404.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ためし】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0406.xhtml">【たら<sub class="variation">2</sub>】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x32860">【たら<sub class="variation">1</sub>】</h1><h4 class="info">［N／Na　だったら］</h4><h4 class="info">［A-かったら］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-たら］</h4><div class="explanation">One of the conjugations of predicates. Expresses a condition or opportunity. Has the same meaning as と, ば and なら (and expresses a general truth or law.) Tends to be used to describe a particular isolated matter rather than a general condition. In comparison to the other three, there are fewer restrictions on clause-final forms. Often used in spoken language. Polite forms are N/Na でしたら and V-ましたら. There is no polite form for たら clauses with i-adjectives. There is also a slightly old-fashioned expression たらば,  in which ば is appended.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x32882"><span class="number">1. </span>...たら〈not-yet-realized condition〉</h2><div class="explanation">Expresses the relation of two isolated matters, such as “if X comes about, then Y will, too” or “if X comes about, then it will make Y come about, too.” X expresses both matters that have and have not come about, while Y always expresses something that has not yet come about. Y is used in declaratory sentences stating an unrealized matter or supposition, sentences expressing intention or hope, and indicative sentences which express imperatives, prohibitions, or invitations.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x32895"><span class="number">a. </span>...たら+<ruby><rb>未</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>実</rb><rt>じつ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>現</rb><rt>げん</rt></ruby>のことがら</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>雨</rb><rt>あめ</rt></ruby>だったら<ruby><rb>道</rb><rt>みち</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>混雑</rb><rt>こん ざつ</rt></ruby>するだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">If it rains, the road will probably get crowded with traffic.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>もしも、あまり<ruby><rb>高</rb><rt>たか</rt></ruby>かったら<ruby><rb>誰</rb><rt>だれ</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>わないでしょう。</span>／<span class="translation">If it should be too expensive, probably no one will buy it.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>万一</rb><rt>まん いち</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>雨</rb><rt>あめ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>降</rb><rt>ふ</rt></ruby>ったら<ruby><rb>試合</rb><rt>し あい</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>中止</rb><rt>ちゅう し</rt></ruby>です。</span>／<span class="translation">In the event that it rains, the match will be canceled.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>この<ruby><rb>薬</rb><rt>くすり</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>飲</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>んだらすぐにせきはとまりますが、3<ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby>たったら<ruby><rb>効</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>目</rb><rt>め</rt></ruby>がなくなります。</span>／<span class="translation">If you take this medicine, your cough will stop immediately, but the effect will wear off after three hours.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>あんなに<ruby><rb>美人</rb><rt>び じん</rt></ruby>だったら、<ruby><rb>男性</rb><rt>だん せい</rt></ruby>がほうっておかないだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">Such a beauty like that will probably not be left alone by any man.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span>ここまで<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>たら、<ruby><rb>一人</rb><rt>ひとり</rt></ruby>でも<ruby><rb>帰</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>れます。</span>／<span class="translation">Once I’ve come this far, I can make my way home alone.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（7）</span>そんなにたくさん<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べたらおなかをこわしますよ。</span>／<span class="translation">You’ll upset your stomach if you eat so much.</span></div><div class="explanation">Usage for when Y expresses a statement about matters which have not yet come about. The dictionary form of the predicate, or such a predicate combined with the supposition だろう, are used at the end of sentences.</div><div class="explanation">In (1)-(4), both X and Y are matters which have not yet come about, and when X comes about, then Y will follow. もし or 万一 are sometimes used when making suppositions about uncertain matters which have not yet come about or matters which are unlikely to come about. (4) is a usage which simply describes future matters that will come about in sequence, and has less of a suppositional meaning.</div><div class="explanation">In (5)-(7), X has already come about, and based on this a supposition Y is made. X often includes こ／そ／あwords (e.g. ここ, そんな) to indicate a current status. </div><div class="explanation">たら tends to be used for isolated matters, and is unlikely to be used for general conditions expressing a universal truth or law. However, in spoken language, it is sometimes used for expressing repetition of one’s habit or a certain matter, as the following examples show:</div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（8）</span>いつも、5<ruby><rb>時</rb><rt>じ</rt></ruby>になったらすぐ<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>をやめて、テニスをします。</span>／<span class="translation">I always stop working right away and play tennis when it is five o’clock.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（9）</span>ここは<ruby><rb>冬</rb><rt>ふゆ</rt></ruby>になったら<ruby><rb>雪</rb><rt>ゆき</rt></ruby>が1メートルぐらいつもる。</span>／<span class="translation">We get about three meters of snow here when it’s winter.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（10）</span>ふだんは<ruby><rb>昼</rb><rt>ひる</rt></ruby>ご<ruby><rb>飯</rb><rt>はん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べたら<ruby><rb>昼寝</rb><rt>ひる ね</rt></ruby>をしますが、<ruby><rb>今日</rb><rt>きょう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>買物</rb><rt>かい もの</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>かなければなりません。</span>／<span class="translation">I usually take a nap after lunch, but I have to go shopping today.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（11）</span><ruby><rb>古</rb><rt>ふる</rt></ruby>くなったらすぐに<ruby><rb>新</rb><rt>あたら</rt></ruby>しいのに<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>いかえるというような<ruby><rb>生活</rb><rt>せい かつ</rt></ruby>では、お<ruby><rb>金</rb><rt>かね</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>貯</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>まらない。</span>／<span class="translation">You can’t save money if you have the kind of lifestyle where you always buy new things when something gets old.</span></div><div class="explanation">(8)-(11) express the meaning “after X is accomplished, Y will be done.” X expresses a time frame in which Y will come about or that the action will be repeated within that time frame. In this case, たらcan be replaced byと.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x33011"><span class="number">b. </span>...たら+<ruby><rb>表</rb><rt>ひょう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>しゅつ</rt></ruby>・<ruby><rb>働</rb><rt>はたら</rt></ruby>きかけ</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>この<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>完成</rb><rt>かん せい</rt></ruby>したら、<ruby><rb>長</rb><rt>なが</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>休</rb><rt>やす</rt></ruby>みをとるつもりだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Once this job is completed, I intend to take a long vacation.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>もしも1<ruby><rb>千万</rb><rt>せん まん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>円</rb><rt>えん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>宝</rb><rt>たから</rt></ruby>くじに<ruby><rb>当</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>たったら、<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>でも<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>ってあげますよ。</span>／<span class="translation">I’ll buy you anything you want if I win 10 million yen in the lottery.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>教師</rb><rt>きょう し</rt></ruby>になったら<ruby><rb>子</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>どもたちにものをつくる<ruby><rb>楽</rb><rt>たの</rt></ruby>しさを<ruby><rb>教</rb><rt>おし</rt></ruby>えたい。</span>／<span class="translation">If I become a teacher, I want to teach children the joy of making things.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>お<ruby><rb>風呂</rb><rt>ふ ろ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>はい</rt></ruby>ったらすぐ<ruby><rb>寝</rb><rt>ね</rt></ruby>なさい。</span>／<span class="translation">Go to sleep immediately after your bath.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>この<ruby><rb>予防</rb><rt>よ ぼう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>注射</rb><rt>ちゅう しゃ</rt></ruby>をしたら、<ruby><rb>風呂</rb><rt>ふ ろ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>はい</rt></ruby>ってはいけません。</span>／<span class="translation">You should not take a bath after you have this vaccination.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span>お<ruby><rb>酒</rb><rt>さけ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>飲</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>んだら<ruby><rb>絶対</rb><rt>ぜっ たい</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>運転</rb><rt>うん てん</rt></ruby>はするな。</span>／<span class="translation">Never drink and drive. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（7）</span><ruby><rb>宿題</rb><rt>しゅく だい</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>済</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>んだら<ruby><rb>遊</rb><rt>あそ</rt></ruby>びに<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ってもいいよ。</span>／<span class="translation">You may go play once you have finished your homework.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（8）</span><span class="number">A:</span>あちらで<ruby><rb>野田</rb><rt>の だ</rt></ruby>さんに<ruby><rb>会</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>われますか。</span>／<span class="translation">Will you meet Noda-san there?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>ええ、その<ruby><rb>予定</rb><rt>よ てい</rt></ruby>ですが。</span>／<span class="translation">Yes, that’s the plan.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">A:</span>じゃ、お<ruby><rb>会</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>いになったらよろしくお<ruby><rb>伝</rb><rt>つた</rt></ruby>えください。</span>／<span class="translation">Well, in that case please give her my regards.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（9）</span>もしも<ruby><rb>遅</rb><rt>おく</rt></ruby>れたら、<ruby><rb>連絡</rb><rt>れん らく</rt></ruby>してください。</span>／<span class="translation">Please let me know if you’ll be late.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（10）</span><ruby><rb>会議</rb><rt>かい ぎ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>終</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>わったら<ruby><rb>食事</rb><rt>しょく じ</rt></ruby>をしに<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>きましょう。</span>／<span class="translation">Let’s go and have dinner after the meeting is finished.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses meanings such as “When X comes about, let’s do/I want to do Y” and “When X comes about, do Y/don’t do Y/I can do Y/please do Y.” Y contains “expressive” expressions which indicate the speaker’s will/hope or “indicative” expressions, such as commands, prohibitions, permissions, requests, or invitations.</div><div class="explanation">Usually used to express a specific actual outcome about Y, which will come about when X has occurred. X expresses matters that precede Y, and can be replaced by expressions such as “when this happens,” “when you do...,” or “after this.” As shown below, when たら is preceded by a situational predicate such as ある, an <i>i</i>-adjective, or a noun, it means “if that’s the situation”; moreover, if such a situation obtains, the expression shows the will or hope of the speaker or a demand or recommendation to the listener.</div><div class="explanation">When the sentence concerns the listener’s schedule or wish, it is closer to Usage 6 of たら (&lt;introductory utterance&gt;).</div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（11）</span><ruby><rb>暇</rb><rt>ひま</rt></ruby>があったら<ruby><rb>海外旅行</rb><rt>かい がい りょ こう</rt></ruby>をしたい。</span>／<span class="translation">I’d like to travel abroad if I have time.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（12）</span><ruby><rb>暑</rb><rt>あつ</rt></ruby>かったら、<ruby><rb>窓</rb><rt>まど</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>開</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>けてください。</span>／<span class="translation">Please open the window if you’re hot.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（13）</span>お<ruby><rb>暇</rb><rt>ひま</rt></ruby>でしたら、いらっしゃいませんか。</span>／<span class="translation">Would you like to visit me if you are free?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（14）</span>そんなに<ruby><rb>勉強</rb><rt>べん きょう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>嫌</rb><rt>いや</rt></ruby>だったら<ruby><rb>大学</rb><rt>だい がく</rt></ruby>なんかやめてしまえ。</span>／<span class="translation">If you dislike studying that much, then quit college.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（15）</span><ruby><rb>熱</rb><rt>ねつ</rt></ruby>があったら<ruby><rb>休</rb><rt>やす</rt></ruby>んでもいいよ。</span>／<span class="translation">You may take time off if you have a fever.</span></div><div class="explanation">When compared to たら, とand ばhave more restriction on their usage. とcannot be used with “expressive” or “indicative” expressions and when X is a verb indicating action or change, it is odd to use ば for “expressive” or “indicative” meaning. </div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>結婚すれば仕事をやめたい。／I want to quit my job if I marry.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>結婚したら仕事をやめたい。／I want to quit my job when I get married.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>お風呂に入ればすぐ寝なさい。／Go to sleep as soon as if you have a bath.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>お風呂に入ったらすぐ寝なさい。／Go to sleep as soon as you have taken a bath.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x33205"><span class="number">c. </span>...たら+<ruby><rb>問</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>いかけ</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>雨</rb><rt>あめ</rt></ruby>だったら<ruby><rb>試合</rb><rt>し あい</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>中止</rb><rt>ちゅう し</rt></ruby>になりますか。</span>／<span class="translation">If it rains, will the match be canceled?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>結婚</rb><rt>けっ こん</rt></ruby>したら<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>はやめるの？</span>／<span class="translation">You’re going to quit work when you get married?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>ううん、しばらく<ruby><rb>続</rb><rt>つづ</rt></ruby>けるつもりよ。</span>／<span class="translation">No, I plan to continue for a while.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>万一</rb><rt>まん いち</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>雨</rb><rt>あめ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>降</rb><rt>ふ</rt></ruby>ったらどうしましょうか。</span>／<span class="translation">What shall we do in case it rains?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><span class="number">A:</span>もし<ruby><rb>宝</rb><rt>たから</rt></ruby>くじに<ruby><rb>当</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>たったら、<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なに</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>使</rb><rt>つか</rt></ruby>いますか。</span>／<span class="translation">If you win the lottery, what will you use it for?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>すぐに<ruby><rb>使</rb><rt>つか</rt></ruby>わないで<ruby><rb>貯金</rb><rt>ちょ きん</rt></ruby>しておきます。</span>／<span class="translation">I won’t use it right away, I’ll save it.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>大学</rb><rt>だい がく</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>卒業</rb><rt>そつ ぎょう</rt></ruby>したらどうするつもりですか。</span>／<span class="translation">What are you going to do after you graduate?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>オーストラリアに<ruby><rb>留学</rb><rt>りゅう がく</rt></ruby>したいと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>っています。</span>／<span class="translation">I am thinking of studying abroad in Australia.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>社長</rb><rt>しゃ ちょう</rt></ruby>はただ<ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>かけておりますが。</span>／<span class="translation">The company president is currently out of the office.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span><ruby><rb>何時</rb><rt>なん じ</rt></ruby>ごろでしたらお<ruby><rb>帰</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>りでしょうか。</span>／<span class="translation">What time will he be returning?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（7）</span>どのぐらい<ruby><rb>勉強</rb><rt>べん きょう</rt></ruby>したら<ruby><rb>日本語</rb><rt>に ほん ご</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>新聞</rb><rt>しん ぶん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>読</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>めるようになりますか。</span>／<span class="translation">How long do you have to study to be able to read a Japanese newspaper?</span></div><div class="explanation">Used in interrogative sentences which require an answer from the listener, in the form X たら Y か.</div><div class="explanation">(1) and (2) are interrogatives, seeking “yes” or “no” answers; (3)-(7) are cases of interrogatives with question words such as “what” and “how”; (3)-(5) are cases where the Y in “is it Y, if X?” is unknown; and (6)-(7) are cases where X is unknown.</div><div class="explanation">In interrogative sentences where the method or means X for getting a good result is asked about, as in (6) and (7), たらcan be replaced byば, but in interrogatives where it is asked what action Y will take when X comes about, as in (2)-(5), たら is mostly used, and the use of ば is unnatural.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>結婚すれば仕事をやめるつもりですか。／Do you intend to quit your job if you marry?</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>結婚したら仕事をやめるつもりですか。／Do you intend to quit your job when you get married?</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>大学を卒業すればどうしますか。／What are you going to do if you graduate from university?</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>大学を卒業したらどうしますか。／What are you going to do after graduating from university?</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x33362"><span class="number">d. </span><ruby><rb>疑</rb><rt>ぎ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>問</rb><rt>もん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>詞</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>+V-たら...のか</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>何度</rb><rt>なん ど</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ったら<ruby><rb>分</rb><rt>わ</rt></ruby>かるんだ？</span>／<span class="translation">How many times do I have to tell you so you understand?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>人間</rb><rt>にん げん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>戦争</rb><rt>せん そう</rt></ruby>という<ruby><rb>愚行</rb><rt>ぐ こう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>何度</rb><rt>なん ど</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>繰</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>り<ruby><rb>返</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>したら<ruby><rb>気</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>がすむのであろうか？</span>／<span class="translation">How many times do humans have to repeat the foolish action we call war before they have had enough?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>何年</rb><rt>なん ねん</rt></ruby>たったら<ruby><rb>一人前</rb><rt>いち にん まえ</rt></ruby>になれるのだろうか？</span>／<span class="translation">How many years will it take before I am a full-fledged member of society?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>何回</rb><rt>なん かい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>繰</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>り<ruby><rb>返</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>したら<ruby><rb>覚</rb><rt>おぼ</rt></ruby>えられるのか？</span>／<span class="translation">How many times do you have to repeat it before you remember it?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>どれだけ<ruby><rb>待</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>ったら<ruby><rb>平和</rb><rt>へい わ</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>世界</rb><rt>せ かい</rt></ruby>になるのだろうか？</span>／<span class="translation">How long do we have to wait to see a world at peace?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>一体</rb><rt>いっ たい</rt></ruby>どうしたら<ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>いを<ruby><rb>伝</rb><rt>つた</rt></ruby>えることができるのか？</span>／<span class="translation">Just how can I best convey my thoughts now?</span></div><div class="explanation">This is an ironic expression where the たら form of the verb is attached to question words such as 何/どれだけ/どんなに. Means “no matter how ..., things won’t happen the way one wants them to,” and expresses irritation or despair regarding the situation. These sentences end with のか or のだ/のだろう（か）. V-たらcan be replaced by V-ば.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x33411"><span class="number">e. </span>...たらどんなに...か</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>宝</rb><rt>たから</rt></ruby>くじに<ruby><rb>当</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>たったらどんなにうれしいだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">How happy I would be if I won the lottery!</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>合格</rb><rt>ごう かく</rt></ruby>したら<ruby><rb>両親</rb><rt>りょう しん</rt></ruby>はどんなに<ruby><rb>喜</rb><rt>よろこ</rt></ruby>んでくれるだろうか。</span>／<span class="translation">How happy my parents would be if I passed the examination!</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>たちがもどってきたらどんなににぎやかになることか。</span>／<span class="translation">How lively it will be when the children return!</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “how good it will be if X comes about.” Used when expressing a strong wish that X will be realized or expressing the feeling that if it comes about, then one would be really happy. だろう（か） or ことかare used at the end of the sentence.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x33445"><span class="number">2. </span>...たら〈counter-factual〉</h2><h3 class="subsubtitle" id="idsubsubtitlex1x33448"><span class="number">a. </span>...たら　...だろう／...はずだ</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>あのとき<ruby><rb>精密</rb><rt>せいみつ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>検査</rb><rt>けん さ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>受</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>けていたら、<ruby><rb>手遅</rb><rt>て おく</rt></ruby>れにならなかっただろう。</span>／<span class="translation">Had there been a detailed check-up at that time, it wouldn’t have been too late.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>隕石</rb><rt>いん せき</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>地球</rb><rt>ち きゅう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>衝突</rb><rt>しょう とつ</rt></ruby>していなかったら<ruby><rb>恐竜</rb><rt>きょう りゅう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>絶滅</rb><rt>ぜつ めつ</rt></ruby>していなかったかもしれない。</span>／<span class="translation">Dinosaurs might not have died out had a meteorite not hit the earth.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>ひどい<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はなし</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>聞</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>かなかったら、こんなに<ruby><rb>酔</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>うまで<ruby><rb>飲</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>んだりしなかったにちがいない。</span>／<span class="translation">If I hadn’t heard the horrible story, I’m sure I wouldn’t have drunk myself to this point.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>あの<ruby><rb>時</rb><rt>とき</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>結婚</rb><rt>けっ こん</rt></ruby>していたら、<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>人生</rb><rt>じん せい</rt></ruby>はもっと<ruby><rb>幸</rb><rt>しあわ</rt></ruby>せだったはずだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Had I married him at the time, my life would have been happier.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>あの<ruby><rb>当時</rb><rt>とう じ</rt></ruby>この「<ruby><rb>薬</rb><rt>くすり</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>害</rb><rt>がい</rt></ruby>」という<ruby><rb>本</rb><rt>ほん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>読</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>んでいたら<ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>ごろ<ruby><rb>苦</rb><rt>くる</rt></ruby>しまなくてもよかったのに<ruby><rb>残念</rb><rt>ざん ねん</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">What a pity. Had I read the book <i>The </i><i>Harm of Medicine</i> in those days, I might not have had to suffer as I do now.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>面接</rb><rt>めん せつ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>試験</rb><rt>し けん</rt></ruby>、うまくいった？</span>／<span class="translation">Did the interview test go all right?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>うまくいっていたら、こんな<ruby><rb>顔</rb><rt>かお</rt></ruby>していないよ。</span>／<span class="translation">I wouldn’t look like this if it had gone well.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（7）</span><ruby><rb>点数</rb><rt>てん すう</rt></ruby>があと 10 <ruby><rb>点</rb><rt>てん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>高</rb><rt>たか</rt></ruby>かったらこの<ruby><rb>大学</rb><rt>だい がく</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>合格</rb><rt>ごう かく</rt></ruby>できるんだけど。</span>／<span class="translation">I would be able to pass the entrance exam to this university if only my score were ten points higher.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to make a supposition different from what has actually happened or the opposite of what has actually happened, and expresses what something would have been like if such were the case. In most cases, the verb is put into the stative form V-ていたら.</div><div class="explanation">When making a supposition which is contrary to the facts in the past, the <i>ta</i>-form of predicates, such as ただろう/はずだ/のに, is used at the end of the sentence. On the other hand, when making a supposition which is contrary to the current situation, the dictionary form, such as ...するのに/のだが, is used, as in (6) and (7).</div><div class="explanation">In this usage, たら can be replaced by ば, but たら is more colloquial. Refer to ば (Usage 4) for a more detailed explanation of conditional sentence patterns expressing counter-factual matters.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x33543"><span class="number">b. </span>...たらどんなに...か</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>背</rb><rt>せ</rt></ruby>があと 10 センチ<ruby><rb>高</rb><rt>たか</rt></ruby>かったらどんなによかっただろうか。</span>／<span class="translation">How nice it would be if only I were ten centimeters taller.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>10 <ruby><rb>年</rb><rt>ねん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>前</rb><rt>まえ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>会</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>っていたらどんなによかっただろう。</span>／<span class="translation">How nice it would have been had I met her ten years ago.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>祖母</rb><rt>そ ぼ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>生</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>きていたら、どんなに<ruby><rb>喜</rb><rt>よろこ</rt></ruby>んだことか。</span>／<span class="translation">If my grandmother were alive, how pleased she would have been.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>すぐあなたに<ruby><rb>会</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>えたらどんなにうれしいだろうか。</span>／<span class="translation">How happy I would be if I could meet you right now!</span></div><div class="explanation">Used when X is impossible or contrary to reality, and means “how good it would have been if X were the case.” Expresses the feeling that one has the strong wish that X will come about, but regrets that such a thing cannot ever happen.</div><div class="explanation">When making a supposition contrary to what has already come about, ただろうか is used, as in (1)-(3), and when something has not come about yet, and it seems impossible that it will ever happen, るだろうか is used, as in (4). </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x33593"><span class="number">3. </span>...たら...た〈already-realized condition〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>空港</rb><rt>くう こう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>着</rb><rt>つ</rt></ruby>いたら<ruby><rb>友達</rb><rt>とも だち</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>迎</rb><rt>むか</rt></ruby>えに<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>ていた。</span>／<span class="translation">When I arrived at the airport, my friend was waiting to meet me.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>トンネルを<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>たら<ruby><rb>一面</rb><rt>いち めん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>銀世界</rb><rt>ぎん せ かい</rt></ruby>だった。</span>／<span class="translation">Coming out of the tunnel brought us into a winter wonderland.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>変</rb><rt>へん</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>音</rb><rt>おと</rt></ruby>がするので<ruby><rb>隣</rb><rt>となり</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>部屋</rb><rt>へ や</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ってみたらねずみがいた。</span>／<span class="translation">I went to the room next door because I heard a strange sound, and there was a mouse.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>山田</rb><rt>やま だ</rt></ruby>さんは<ruby><rb>無口</rb><rt>む くち</rt></ruby>でおとなしい<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>だと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>っていたが、よく<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はなし</rt></ruby>をしたらとても<ruby><rb>面白</rb><rt>おも しろ</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>だということが<ruby><rb>分</rb><rt>わ</rt></ruby>かった。</span>／<span class="translation">I thought Yamada-san was a quiet, timid person, but when I spoke to him, I realized that he was a very amusing person.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>お<ruby><rb>風呂</rb><rt>ふ ろ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>はい</rt></ruby>っていたら、<ruby><rb>電話</rb><rt>でん わ</rt></ruby>がかかってきた。</span>／<span class="translation">The phone rang when I was in the bath.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span>デパートで<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>物</rb><rt>もの</rt></ruby>していたら、<ruby><rb>隣</rb><rt>となり</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>奥</rb><rt>おく</rt></ruby>さんにばったり<ruby><rb>会</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>った。</span>／<span class="translation">I ran into the lady from next door when I was shopping at the supermarket.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（7）</span>5<ruby><rb>月</rb><rt>がつ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>はい</rt></ruby>ったら<ruby><rb>急</rb><rt>きゅう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>暑</rb><rt>あつ</rt></ruby>くなった。</span>／<span class="translation">The weather suddenly turned hot right at the beginning of May.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（8）</span><ruby><rb>薬</rb><rt>くすり</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>飲</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>んだら<ruby><rb>熱</rb><rt>ねつ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>下</rb><rt>さ</rt></ruby>がった。</span>／<span class="translation">My temperature went down when I took the medicine.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（9）</span><ruby><rb>会社</rb><rt>かい しゃ</rt></ruby>をやめたらストレスがなくなって<ruby><rb>元気</rb><rt>げん き</rt></ruby>になった。</span>／<span class="translation">After I quit the company, my stress went away and I recovered.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（10）</span><ruby><rb>落</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>ちてもともとと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>って<ruby><rb>試験</rb><rt>し けん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>受</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>けたら、<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>いがけず<ruby><rb>合格</rb><rt>ごう かく</rt></ruby>した。</span>／<span class="translation">I took the examination thinking I would fail, but I unexpectedly passed it.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（11）</span><ruby><rb>部屋</rb><rt>へ や</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>様子</rb><rt>よう す</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>変</rb><rt>へん</rt></ruby>だと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>ったら、<ruby><rb>案</rb><rt>あん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>定</rb><rt>じょう</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>空</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>巣</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>はい</rt></ruby>られていた。</span>／<span class="translation">I thought something about the room seemed strange and, just as I feared, someone had broken in.</span></div><div class="explanation">The XたらYた pattern is used to indicate that both the former and the latter have already come about. It is used when the speaker realizes Y at the point when X has already come about, or when a new situation happens as a result of it. Following Y are expressions stating that something has occurred beyond the speaker’s control, or some fact has been newly discovered or realized. </div><div class="explanation">(1)-(4) are usages in which the speaker discovers situation Y at the scene where action X has already been done. The discoverer, 私, is not mentioned in Y as in ...たら、私は...した, but instead the speaker uses expressions to portray the situation, such as ...たら...ということが分かった, ...たら...がいた or ...たら...があった. </div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>隣の部屋に行ったら、私はねずみを見た。／If I go to the room next door, I saw a mouse.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>隣の部屋に行ったら、ねずみがいた。／When I went to the room next door, there was a mouse.</div><div class="explanation">Expressions of state, such as V-ていた or Nだった, are used for Y where newly-realized discoveries are expressed, as in (1) and (2).</div><div class="explanation">On the other hand, if V-たis used instead of V-ていた, the meaning changes as follows.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>空港に着いたら友達が迎えに来た。／After I arrived at the airport, my friend came to meet me. </div><div class="explanation">In the example above, the active expression来たis used instead of 来ていた. This is used to indicate that after the speaker arrived at the airport, the friend arrived to meet him, rather than that the speaker found the friend upon arrival, as in (1) above.</div><div class="explanation">As in (10) and (11), when what follows the supposition in the second clause is the expected outcome, 案の定 or やっぱりare used; when the result is unexpected, then 案外、意外なことに or 思いがけず are frequently used.</div><div class="explanation">たら in this usage is often replaced by と. However, if X and Y both indicate the same person’s consecutive action of which that person has control, only と can be used, and not たら.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>男は部屋に入ったら友達に電話した。／If the man entered the room, he phoned his friend.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>男は部屋に入ると友達に電話した。／The man called his friend when he entered the room.</div><div class="explanation">While と is used in novels or stories, たら is used to describe things which the speaker has directly experienced.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x33784"><span class="number">4. </span>...たらさいご</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>寝</rb><rt>ね</rt></ruby>たら<ruby><rb>最後</rb><rt>さい ご</rt></ruby>、まわりでどんなに<ruby><rb>騒</rb><rt>さわ</rt></ruby>いでも<ruby><rb>絶対</rb><rt>ぜっ たい</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>目</rb><rt>め</rt></ruby>をさまさない。</span>／<span class="translation">Once he falls asleep, he won’t wake up no matter how noisy it is around him. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>賭事</rb><rt>かけ ごと</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>一度</rb><rt>いち ど</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>手</rb><rt>て</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>だ</rt></ruby>したら<ruby><rb>最後</rb><rt>さい ご</rt></ruby>ずるずると<ruby><rb>抜</rb><rt>ぬ</rt></ruby>けられなくなる<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>多</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>い。</span>／<span class="translation">With gambling, many people cannot break free from it once they have given it a try.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>すっぽんは<ruby><rb>一度</rb><rt>いち ど</rt></ruby>かみついたら<ruby><rb>最後</rb><rt>さい ご</rt></ruby>どんなことがあっても<ruby><rb>離</rb><rt>はな</rt></ruby>れない。</span>／<span class="translation">Once a snapping turtle bites something, it won’t let go no matter what happens. </span></div><div class="explanation">Means that once something has happened, because of its characteristics or a strong determination, the situation will not change subsequently. Often used in the form 一度...たらさいご絶対に....</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x33815"><span class="number">5. </span>...たら...で</h2><h4 class="info">［A-かったらA-いで］</h4><h4 class="info">［A-かったらA-かったで］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-たらV-たで］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>金</rb><rt>かね</rt></ruby>というのはあったらあったで<ruby><rb>使</rb><rt>つか</rt></ruby>うし、なかったらないで<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>とかなるものだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Money is something that you’ll spend if you have it, and somehow get by if you don’t.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>自動車</rb><rt>じ どう しゃ</rt></ruby>はあれば<ruby><rb>便利</rb><rt>べん り</rt></ruby>だが、なかったらなかったで<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>とかなるものだ。</span>／<span class="translation">A car is convenient if you have one, but you can manage to get by if you don’t.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>母</rb><rt>はは</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>寒</rb><rt>さむ</rt></ruby>がりで<ruby><rb>冬</rb><rt>ふゆ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>苦手</rb><rt>にが て</rt></ruby>だが、それでは<ruby><rb>夏</rb><rt>なつ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>好</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>きかというとそうではない。<ruby><rb>暑</rb><rt>あつ</rt></ruby>かったら<ruby><rb>暑</rb><rt>あつ</rt></ruby>かったで<ruby><rb>文句</rb><rt>もん く</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>っている。</span>／<span class="translation">My mother hates being cold and dislikes winter, but if you think that she likes summer, that’s not the case. If it's hot, she'll complain about that, too.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>息子</rb><rt>むすこ</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>大学</rb><rt>だい がく</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>受</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>かってほしいが、<ruby><rb>受</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>かったら<ruby><rb>受</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>かったでお<ruby><rb>金</rb><rt>かね</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>要</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>って<ruby><rb>大変</rb><rt>たい へん</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">I want my son to pass the university entrance examination, but if he does pass, then it’ll be hard because he’ll need money.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>平社員</rb><rt>ひら しゃ いん</rt></ruby>のときは<ruby><rb>給料</rb><rt>きゅう りょう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>少</rb><rt>すく</rt></ruby>なくて<ruby><rb>困</rb><rt>こま</rt></ruby>ったけど、<ruby><rb>昇進</rb><rt>しょう しん</rt></ruby>したらしたでつきあいも<ruby><rb>増</rb><rt>ふ</rt></ruby>えるしやっぱり<ruby><rb>金</rb><rt>かね</rt></ruby>はたまらない。</span>／<span class="translation">My low salary was a problem when I was a junior employee, but since being promoted I have more socializing and whatnot to do so I still can’t save any money after all.</span></div><div class="explanation">Repeats the same adjectives or verbs twice, before and after. Describes a contrasting circumstance that, despite what happens, will ultimately not differ from the present one.</div><div class="explanation">Some sentences express the meaning “there are problems but they are not too bad/they can be managed somehow,” as in (1) and (2), while other sentences see the situation as undesirable, indicating that “either way it is troublesome/a problem,” as in (3)-(5).</div><div class="explanation"><i>i</i>-adjectives are normally used in the form A-かったらA-かったで, but sometimes the なかったらないでform is also used, as in (1).</div><div class="explanation">...ば...で is a synonymous expression.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x33898"><span class="number">6. </span>...たら〈introductory utterance〉</h2><div class="explanation">Used to indicate under what condition the action in the second part of the sentence may be carried out, by restricting the scope or giving a warning or explanation in advance. It is, to a certain extent, a fixed idiomatic expression. It can be replaced by ば.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x33914"><span class="number">a. </span>...たら+<ruby><rb>依</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>頼</rb><rt>らい</rt></ruby>・<ruby><rb>勧</rb><rt>すす</rt></ruby>め〈introductory utterance〉</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>もし<ruby><rb>差</rb><rt>さ</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>支</rb><rt>つか</rt></ruby>えなかったら<ruby><rb>事情</rb><rt>じ じょう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>聞</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>かせてください。</span>／<span class="translation">Please tell me the circumstances, if you don’t mind.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>よろしかったら、もう<ruby><rb>一度</rb><rt>いち ど</rt></ruby>お<ruby><rb>電話</rb><rt>でん わ</rt></ruby>くださいませんか。</span>／<span class="translation">Would you call me again, if you don’t mind?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>よかったら、<ruby><rb>週末</rb><rt>しゅう まつ</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>家</rb><rt>いえ</rt></ruby>にいらっしゃいませんか。</span>／<span class="translation">Would you like to visit our home this weekend?</span></div><div class="explanation">Idiomatic expression used for politely asking the convenience of the other person when making a request or recommendation. </div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x33948"><span class="number">b. </span>...たら〈introductory utterance〉</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>たら、こんなことはたいした<ruby><rb>問題</rb><rt>もん だい</rt></ruby>ではない。</span>／<span class="translation">From where I stand, it doesn’t seem like a serious problem.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>わせたら、<ruby><rb>責任</rb><rt>せき にん</rt></ruby>はあなたの<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>ほう</rt></ruby>にあるんじゃないかと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>う。</span>／<span class="translation">If you ask me, I’d say the responsibility lies with you.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>一時代</rb><rt>いち じ だい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>前</rb><rt>まえ</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>比</rb><rt>くら</rt></ruby>べたら、<ruby><rb>家事</rb><rt>か じ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>格段</rb><rt>かく だん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>楽</rb><rt>らく</rt></ruby>になったと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>える。</span>／<span class="translation">It can be said that housework has become far easier in comparison with a generation ago.</span></div><div class="explanation">This is one way of warning in advance from what viewpoint the utterance or judgment in the latter part of the sentence is made. It follows verbs that express a statement, an idea, or a comparison, such as 見る(see), 思う(think) and 比べる(compare), in the first part of the sentence. It is to a certain degree an idiomatic expression.</div><div class="explanation">からしたら or から言ったらare synonymous expressions.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x33992"><span class="number">7. </span>V-たら〈suggestion, recommendation〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>立</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>って<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>てないで、ちょっと<ruby><rb>手伝</rb><rt>て つだ</rt></ruby>ってあげたら。</span>／<span class="translation">Why don’t you lend a hand instead of just standing and watching?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>危</rb><rt>あぶ</rt></ruby>ないからやめといたら。</span>／<span class="translation">It’s dangerous, so don’t do it.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>そんなに<ruby><rb>疲</rb><rt>つか</rt></ruby>れているなら、すこし<ruby><rb>休</rb><rt>やす</rt></ruby>んだら？</span>／<span class="translation">How about resting a little, if you’re so tired?</span></div><div class="explanation">This is an expression to recommend that the listener take a certain action. The latter half of V-たらどうか is omitted. It is usually used when speaking to someone with whom the speaker is on familiar terms. When it is necessary to speak politely, たらどうですか or いかがですか are used without abbreviating the latter half.</div><div class="explanation">Can be replaced by V-ば; however, たら has the nuance that the speaker is seriously recommending something, while the use of ば can contain the nuance that the speaker in fact is merely stating an option without any particular preference.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x34033"><span class="number">8. </span>...からいったら<span class="reference">→<a href="part0155.xhtml#idsubtitlex1x13074">【からいう】1</a></span></h2><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x34041"><span class="number">9. </span>...からしたら<span class="reference">→<a href="part0160.xhtml#idsubtitlex1x13353">【からする】1</a></span></h2><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x34049"><span class="number">10. </span>...からみたら<span class="reference">→<a href="part0167.xhtml#idsubtitlex1x13563">【からみる】1</a></span></h2><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x34057"><span class="number">11. </span>...といったら<span class="reference">→<a href="part0536.xhtml#idtitlex1x50448">【といったらありはしない】</a>、<a href="part0537.xhtml#idtitlex1x50478">【といったらありゃしない】</a>、<a href="part0538.xhtml#idtitlex1x50508">【といったらない】</a></span></h2><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x34068"><span class="number">12. </span>...ときたら<span class="reference">→<a href="part0569.xhtml#idtitlex1x53741">【ときたら】</a></span></h2><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x34075"><span class="number">13. </span>...としたら<span class="reference">→<a href="part0585.xhtml#idtitlex1x55477">【としたら】</a></span></h2><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x34082"><span class="number">14. </span>...となったら<span class="reference">→<a href="part0606.xhtml#idtitlex1x57464">【となったら】</a></span></h2><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x34089"><span class="number">15. </span>V-てみたら<span class="reference">→<a href="part0495.xhtml#idsubtitlex1x44714">【てみる】4</a></span></h2><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x34097"><span class="number">16. </span>...にかかったら<span class="reference">→<a href="part0754.xhtml#idtitlex1x70239">【にかかっては】</a></span></h2><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x34104"><span class="number">17. </span>...にかけたら<span class="reference">→<a href="part0759.xhtml#idtitlex1x70457">【にかけたら】</a>、<a href="part0760.xhtml#idsubtitlex1x70523">【にかけて】2</a></span></h2><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x34114"><span class="number">18. </span>...にしたら<span class="reference">→<a href="part0785.xhtml#idtitlex1x71629">【にしたら】</a></span></h2><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x34121"><span class="number">19. </span>...にしてみたら<span class="reference">→<a href="part0790.xhtml#idtitlex1x71890">【にしてみれば】</a></span></h2><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x34128"><span class="number">20. </span>...によったら／ことによったら<span class="reference">→<a href="part0842.xhtml#idsubsubtitlex1x75025">【によると】1b</a></span></h2><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x34137"><span class="number">21. </span>だったら<span class="reference">→<a href="part0383.xhtml#idtitlex1x31135">【だったら】</a></span></h2></body></html>