<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>まして</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0939.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【まじき】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0941.xhtml">【まず】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x89158">【まして】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x89160"><span class="number">1. </span>まして（や）</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>日本語</rb><rt>に ほん ご</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>勉強</rb><rt>べん きょう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>始</rb><rt>はじ</rt></ruby>めて3<ruby><rb>年</rb><rt>ねん</rt></ruby>になるが、まだ<ruby><rb>新聞</rb><rt>しん ぶん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>読</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>むのも<ruby><rb>難</rb><rt>むずか</rt></ruby>しい。まして<ruby><rb>古典</rb><rt>こ てん</rt></ruby>などはとても<ruby><rb>読</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>めない。</span>／<span class="translation">It has been three years since I started learning Japanese, but it is hard enough reading newspapers, let alone the classics.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>この<ruby><rb>辺</rb><rt>あた</rt></ruby>りは<ruby><rb>昼</rb><rt>ひる</rt></ruby>でも<ruby><rb>人通</rb><rt>ひと どお</rt></ruby>りが<ruby><rb>少</rb><rt>すく</rt></ruby>ない。まして<ruby><rb>夜</rb><rt>よる</rt></ruby>ともなると、<ruby><rb>怖</rb><rt>こわ</rt></ruby>くて<ruby><rb>一人</rb><rt>ひとり</rt></ruby>では<ruby><rb>歩</rb><rt>ある</rt></ruby>けない。</span>／<span class="translation">There are very few people who pass through this area even during the day. It goes without saying that at night I would be too scared to walk about on my own.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>僕</rb><rt>ぼく</rt></ruby>にでもできた<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>だ。まして<ruby><rb>君</rb><rt>きみ</rt></ruby>のような<ruby><rb>優秀</rb><rt>ゆう しゅう</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>人間</rb><rt>にん げん</rt></ruby>にできないはずはない。</span>／<span class="translation">Even I could have done this job. There is no reason why such an able person as you can’t do it.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>家族</rb><rt>か ぞく</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>死</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>常</rb><rt>つね</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>悲</rb><rt>かな</rt></ruby>しい。まして、<ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>死</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>ともなれば、<ruby><rb>残</rb><rt>のこ</rt></ruby>された<ruby><rb>者</rb><rt>もの</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>嘆</rb><rt>なげ</rt></ruby>きは、いかばかりであろうか。</span>／<span class="translation">A death in the family is always sad. And when it is the death of a child, how absolutely devastating it must be for the surviving family. </span></div><div class="explanation">Often used in the patterns Xは...ましてYは... or Xでも...ましてYは.... Comparing X with Y, which possesses the quality used to describe X to an even greater extent, it means “as even X is (descriptive expression), Y is of course even more so.” ましてや is a rather formal expression that has the tone of written language.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x89197"><span class="number">2. </span>Nにもまして</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>日本</rb><rt>に ほん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>夏</rb><rt>なつ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>暑</rb><rt>あつ</rt></ruby>い。しかし、<ruby><rb>暑</rb><rt>あつ</rt></ruby>さにもまして<ruby><rb>耐</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>えがたいのは、<ruby><rb>湿度</rb><rt>しつ ど</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>高</rb><rt>たか</rt></ruby>さだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Japanese summers are hot. However, what’s even harder to bear than the heat is the high level of humidity.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>本当</rb><rt>ほん  とう</rt></ruby>にいい<ruby><rb>映画</rb><rt>えい が</rt></ruby>だった。<ruby><rb>映像</rb><rt>えい ぞう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>美</rb><rt>うつく</rt></ruby>しさはもちろんだが、それにもまして<ruby><rb>音楽</rb><rt>おん がく</rt></ruby>がすばらしかった。</span>／<span class="translation">It really was a good movie. The images were beautiful, of course, but the music was even more wonderful.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>はもともとまじめでよく<ruby><rb>働</rb><rt>はたら</rt></ruby>く<ruby><rb>人間</rb><rt>にん げん</rt></ruby>だが、<ruby><rb>子</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>どもが<ruby><rb>生</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>まれてからというもの、<ruby><rb>以前</rb><rt>い ぜん</rt></ruby>にもましてよく<ruby><rb>働</rb><rt>はたら</rt></ruby>くようになった。</span>／<span class="translation">By nature he’s a hardworking person, but since his children were born, he works even harder than before.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なに</rt></ruby>にもましてうれしかったのは、<ruby><rb>友人</rb><rt>ゆう じん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>加藤</rb><rt>か とう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>君</rb><rt>くん</rt></ruby>と 10 <ruby><rb>年</rb><rt>ねん</rt></ruby>ぶりに<ruby><rb>再会</rb><rt>さい かい</rt></ruby>できたことだった。</span>／<span class="translation">What made me happier than anything else was meeting my friend Kato-kun again for the first time in ten years.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used in the patterns Xにもまして...なのはYだ, XにもましてYが... etc., means “X is of course (descriptive expression) but Y is more so.” By comparing Y to X, the expression emphasizes the high degree to which Y possesses the quality discussed. As in the case of (3), when used in the form 前にもまして or 以前にもまして it means “still (even) more than before.” As in the case of (4), 何にもまして means “more than anything,” “the most.”</div></body></html>