<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>おきに</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0094.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【おかげで】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0096.xhtml">【おそらく】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x8148">【おきに】</h1><h4 class="info">［数量詞+おきに］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>大学</rb><rt>だい がく</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>きのバスは 10 <ruby><rb>分</rb><rt>ぷん</rt></ruby>おきに<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>ている。</span>／<span class="translation">The buses to the university run every ten minutes.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>この<ruby><rb>薬</rb><rt>くすり</rt></ruby>は2<ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby>おきに<ruby><rb>飲</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>んでください。</span>／<span class="translation">Please take this medicine every two hours.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>この<ruby><rb>道路</rb><rt>どう ろ</rt></ruby>には 10 mおきにポプラが<ruby><rb>植</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>えられている。</span>／<span class="translation">On this street, poplars have been planted at intervals of ten meters.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>このあたりは<ruby><rb>高級</rb><rt>こう きゅう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>住宅</rb><rt>じゅう たく</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>街</rb><rt>がい</rt></ruby>で、2<ruby><rb>軒</rb><rt>けん</rt></ruby>おきぐらいに<ruby><rb>外車</rb><rt>がい しゃ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>持</rb><rt>も</rt></ruby>っている<ruby><rb>家</rb><rt>いえ</rt></ruby>がある。</span>／<span class="translation">This area is an upscale residential district, and every third house or so has an imported car.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>映画館</rb><rt>えい が かん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>はい</rt></ruby>ると、<ruby><rb>座席</rb><rt>ざ せき</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>一</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>つおきにしかあいていなかったので、<ruby><rb>友達</rb><rt>とも だち</rt></ruby>とは<ruby><rb>離</rb><rt>はな</rt></ruby>れて<ruby><rb>座</rb><rt>すわ</rt></ruby>ることになった。</span>／<span class="translation">When we got into the theater, every other seat was taken, so my friend and I ended up sitting separately.</span></div><div class="explanation">Usually follows a word expressing time or distance and means “with that amount of time or space in between.” The words used with おき in (4) and (5) don’t express distance, but they do refer to things arranged in a line (houses (4), seats (5)) and are interpreted to express distance. When おきに refers to a point in time or space, as in (1)-(3), it can be replaced with ごとに. However, when おきに and ごとに are used to refer to the number one, they differ in meaning, as shown in the examples below.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>1年おきに大会が開かれる。（2年に1回）／The meeting is held every other year.  (= once every two years)</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>1年ごとに大会が開かれる。（1年に1回）／The meeting is held every year.  (= once a year)</div></body></html>