<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>というのは</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0525.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【というところだ】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0527.xhtml">【というのも】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x49753">【というのは】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x49755"><span class="number">1. </span>というのは</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>駅前</rb><rt>えき まえ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>開発</rb><rt>かい はつ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>計画</rb><rt>けい かく</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>急</rb><rt>きゅう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>取</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>りやめになった。というのは、<ruby><rb>地域</rb><rt>ち いき</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>住民</rb><rt>じゅう みん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>強硬</rb><rt>きょう こう</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>反対</rb><rt>はん たい</rt></ruby>で、マスコミまでが<ruby><rb>騒</rb><rt>さわ</rt></ruby>ぎだしたからだ。</span>／<span class="translation">The development plans for the area in front of the station were suddenly canceled. The reason for this was the stubborn opposition of local residents, which led to a furor in the mass media.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>申</rb><rt>もう</rt></ruby>しわけありませんが、<ruby><rb>来週</rb><rt>らい しゅう</rt></ruby>お<ruby><rb>休</rb><rt>やす</rt></ruby>みをいただけないでしょうか。というのは、<ruby><rb>国</rb><rt>くに</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>母</rb><rt>はは</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>突然</rb><rt>とつ ぜん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>訪</rb><rt>たず</rt></ruby>ねてくることになったんです。</span>／<span class="translation">I am really sorry, but could I possibly have some time off next week? I’m asking this because my mother will be making an unexpected trip here from my hometown.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><span class="number">A:</span>あしたのご<ruby><rb>都合</rb><rt>つ ごう</rt></ruby>はいかがですか。</span>／<span class="translation">How is your schedule tomorrow?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>あしたはちょっと<ruby><rb>都合</rb><rt>つ ごう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>悪</rb><rt>わる</rt></ruby>いんです。というのは、<ruby><rb>東京</rb><rt>とう きょう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>かけることになっているものですから。</span>／<span class="translation">Tomorrow is not really convenient for me. It’s because I am already scheduled to go to Tokyo.</span></div><div class="explanation">This expression links to the preceding sentence and is used to explain the cause or reason for the situation described in that sentence, or to add a supplementary statement of the rationale for the speaker’s judgment, etc. The subsequent sentence, which starts with というのは, often ends with expressions such as からだ or のだ.</div><div class="explanation">Although というのは is similar to なぜなら, なぜなら is used in cases of an obvious cause-effect relationship, while というのは does not necessarily require a clear cause-effect relationship when it is used to provide a supplementary explanation about a certain situation. Also, なぜなら is a written language expression, while というのは is most often used in spoken language.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x49808"><span class="number">2. </span>...というのは...ということだ</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>レイさんが<ruby><rb>少</rb><rt>すこ</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>遅</rb><rt>おそ</rt></ruby>くなるというのは<ruby><rb>一時間</rb><rt>いち じ かん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>遅</rb><rt>おく</rt></ruby>れるということだ。</span>／<span class="translation">That Ray-san is going to be slightly delayed means he’ll be an hour late.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>この<ruby><rb>地方</rb><rt>ち ほう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>全体</rb><rt>ぜん たい</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>雨</rb><rt>あめ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>一時間</rb><rt>いち じ かん</rt></ruby>に10 センチ<ruby><rb>降</rb><rt>ふ</rt></ruby>るというのは、<ruby><rb>洪水</rb><rt>こう ずい</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>起</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>こるということだ。</span>／<span class="translation">A rainfall of ten centimeters in just one hour over this entire region means that there will be floods.</span></div><div class="explanation">This expression is synonymous with ということは...（ということ）だ.</div><h4 class="reference">→<a href="part0523.xhtml#idsubtitlex1x49419">【ということ】3</a></h4><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x49838"><span class="number">3. </span>...というのはNのことだ</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>パソコンというのはパーソナルコンピューターのことだ。</span>／<span class="translation"><i>Pasokon</i> means a personal computer.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>十五夜</rb><rt>じゅう ご や</rt></ruby>というのは、<ruby><rb>満月</rb><rt>まん げつ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>る<ruby><rb>夜</rb><rt>よる</rt></ruby>のことだ。</span>／<span class="translation">The term <i>j</i><i>uu</i><i>goya</i> refers to a night with a full moon.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to present a definition, explanation, or interpretation of the meaning of a word, phrase, or sentence.</div></body></html>