<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ことにする</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0227.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ことにしている】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0229.xhtml">【ことになっている】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x17936">【ことにする】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x17941"><span class="number">1. </span>...ことにする〈decision〉</h2><h4 class="info">［Vことにする］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>あしたからジョギングすることにしよう。</span>／<span class="translation">Starting tomorrow, I am going to jog. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>これからはあまりあまい<ruby><rb>物</rb><rt>もの</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べないことにしよう。</span>／<span class="translation">From now on, I'm not going to eat so many sweets.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>きょうはどこへも<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>かないで<ruby><rb>勉強</rb><rt>べん きょう</rt></ruby>することにしたよ。</span>／<span class="translation">I decided not to go anywhere and just study today. </span></div><div class="explanation">Indicates a decision or resolution to perform an action in the future. When the form ことにした is used, as in (3), it conveys the meaning that a decision or resolution has already been made. こととする has the same meaning as ことにする, but こととする is more formal and tends to be used in written language.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x17977"><span class="number">2. </span>...ことにする〈treatment〉</h2><h4 class="info">［N（だ）ということにする］</h4><h4 class="info">［Na　だということにする］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-た（という）ことにする］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>その<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はなし</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>聞</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>かなかった（という）ことにしましょう。</span>／<span class="translation">Let’s just say that we never heard that story.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>その<ruby><rb>件</rb><rt>けん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>検討中</rb><rt>けん とう ちゅう</rt></ruby>（だ）ということにして、すこしなりゆきを<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>まもろう。</span>／<span class="translation">Let’s put that matter under consideration and see how things go for a while. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>敵</rb><rt>てき</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>攻撃</rb><rt>こう げき</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>対</rb><rt>たい</rt></ruby>する<ruby><rb>防御</rb><rt>ぼう ぎょ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby>をかせぐために、<ruby><rb>大統領</rb><rt>だい とう りょう</rt></ruby>はすこぶる<ruby><rb>健康</rb><rt>けん こう</rt></ruby>だということにしておくべきだ。</span>／<span class="translation">We’d better pretend that the president is in excellent health, in order to gain time to prepare a defense against attacks from the enemy. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>出張</rb><rt>しゅっ ちょう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>った（という）ことにして<ruby><rb>出張費</rb><rt>しゅっ ちょう ひ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>着服</rb><rt>ちゃく ふく</rt></ruby>したり<ruby><rb>不正</rb><rt>ふ せい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>流用</rb><rt>りゅう よう</rt></ruby>することを、<ruby><rb>俗</rb><rt>ぞく</rt></ruby>に「カラ<ruby><rb>出張</rb><rt>しゅっ ちょう</rt></ruby>」と<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>う。</span>／<span class="translation">Pretending to have been on a business trip and pocketing or misappropriating the travel expenses is commonly known as a <i>kara</i><i>-</i><i>shu</i><i>t</i><i>ch</i><i>oo</i> (phoney business trip).</span></div><div class="explanation">Attached to a clause describing an action or state, this expression is used to pretend something is true when it isn’t, or to signal that someone will handle a situation in a certain way. When used with a noun, it takes the form N(だ)ということにする, as in (2). With verbs, it follows the <i>ta</i>-form, as in (1) and (4). In that case, use of という is optional. ...こととする, which has the same meaning, is more formal and used in written language. See Usage 1 of ことになる for a comparison with that expression. </div></body></html>