<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>せっかく</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0311.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【せずに】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0313.xhtml">【せつな】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x24332">【せっかく】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x24334"><span class="number">1. </span>せっかく...からには</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>せっかく<ruby><rb>留学</rb><rt>りゅう がく</rt></ruby>するからには、できる<ruby><rb>限</rb><rt>かぎ</rt></ruby>り<ruby><rb>多</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>くの<ruby><rb>知識</rb><rt>ち しき</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>身</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>につけて<ruby><rb>帰</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>りたい。</span>／<span class="translation">Since I’m going abroad to study, I’d like to return having gained as much knowledge as I can.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>せっかく<ruby><rb>代表</rb><rt>だい ひょう</rt></ruby>として<ruby><rb>選</rb><rt>えら</rt></ruby>ばれたからには、<ruby><rb>全力</rb><rt>ぜん りょく</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>尽</rb><rt>つ</rt></ruby>くさなければならない。</span>／<span class="translation">I must do my very best, since I was chosen to be the representative.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>せっかく<ruby><rb>休暇</rb><rt>きゅう か</rt></ruby>をとるからには、2<ruby><rb>日</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>や3<ruby><rb>日</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>でなく、10<ruby><rb>日</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>ぐらいは<ruby><rb>休</rb><rt>やす</rt></ruby>みたい。</span>／<span class="translation">If I’m taking a vacation, I’d like to take at least ten days or so off, not just two or three.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used in the pattern せっかくXからにはY. X is an action that involves effort, hardship, or a rare opportunity, and Y indicates the speaker’s desire to use such an effort or opportunity effectively. Expressions of intention, hope, advice, etc. are used in Y.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x24365"><span class="number">2. </span>せっかく...けれども</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>せっかくここまできたけれども、<ruby><rb>雨</rb><rt>あめ</rt></ruby>がひどくなってきたから<ruby><rb>引</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>返</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>そう。</span>／<span class="translation">I know we’ve come all this way, but it’s starting to rain harder, so let’s head back.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>せっかく<ruby><rb>皆</rb><rt>みな</rt></ruby>さんに<ruby><rb>骨折</rb><rt>ほね お</rt></ruby>っていただきましたが、<ruby><rb>実</rb><rt>じつ</rt></ruby>はこの<ruby><rb>計画</rb><rt>けい かく</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>取</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>りやめになりました。</span>／<span class="translation">Although you have all worked so hard, I’m afraid this plan has been canceled.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>せっかく<ruby><rb>作</rb><rt>つく</rt></ruby>ったのですが、<ruby><rb>喜</rb><rt>よろこ</rt></ruby>んではもらえなかったようです。</span>／<span class="translation">Despite all the effort I put into making this, it doesn’t seem to have been appreciated.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used in patterns like せっかくXけれどもY and せっかくXがY. X is an action that involves effort, hardship, or a rare opportunity. Y indicates that such an action has been wasted and expresses the speaker’s feeling of sorrow or regret for the waste.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x24396"><span class="number">3. </span>せっかく...のだから</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>せっかく<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>たのだから<ruby><rb>夕飯</rb><rt>ゆう はん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べて<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>きなさい。</span>／<span class="translation">Since you’ve come all this way, have supper before you go.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>せっかくここまで<ruby><rb>努力</rb><rt>ど りょく</rt></ruby>したのだから、<ruby><rb>最後</rb><rt>さい ご</rt></ruby>までやり<ruby><rb>通</rb><rt>とお</rt></ruby>しましょう。</span>／<span class="translation">We’ve worked so hard to get this far, so let’s see it through to the end.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>せっかくおしゃれをしたのだから、どこかいいレストランへ<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>きましょうよ。</span>／<span class="translation">I went to the trouble of getting all dressed up, so let’s go to a nice restaurant somewhere.</span></div><div class="explanation">When せっかく is used in the pattern せっかくX（の）だからY, X is an action that involves effort, hardship, or a rare opportunity, and Y indicates the speaker’s desire to use such an effort or opportunity effectively. Expressions of intention, hope, request, invitation, advice, etc. are used in Y.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x24427"><span class="number">4. </span>せっかく...のだったら</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>せっかくピアノを<ruby><rb>習</rb><rt>なら</rt></ruby>うのだったら、<ruby><rb>少</rb><rt>すこ</rt></ruby>しくらい<ruby><rb>高</rb><rt>たか</rt></ruby>くてもいい<ruby><rb>先生</rb><rt>せん せい</rt></ruby>についた<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>ほう</rt></ruby>がいい。</span>／<span class="translation">If I’m going to learn to play the piano, I may as well find a good teacher, even if it costs a little more.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>せっかく<ruby><rb>京都</rb><rt>きょう と</rt></ruby>まで<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>くのなら、<ruby><rb>奈良</rb><rt>な ら</rt></ruby>にも<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ってみたらどうですか。</span>／<span class="translation">If you’re going all the way to Kyoto, why not go to Nara as well?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>せっかく<ruby><rb>音楽</rb><rt>おん がく</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>楽</rb><rt>たの</rt></ruby>しむのだったら、もうすこし<ruby><rb>音</rb><rt>おと</rt></ruby>のいいステレオを<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>いたい。</span>／<span class="translation">If I’m going to amuse myself by listening to music, I’d like to buy a stereo with better sound quality.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used in patterns like せっかくXのだったらY or せっかくX（の）ならY. Indicates the speaker’s expectation that, if someone gets a rare opportunity or makes an effort to do something, it would be best to make the most of that opportunity or effort. Expressions that indicate intention, hope, advice, etc. are used in Y.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x24458"><span class="number">5. </span>せっかく　...のに／...ても</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>せっかく<ruby><rb>招待</rb><rt>しょう たい</rt></ruby>していただいたのに、<ruby><rb>伺</rb><rt>うかが</rt></ruby>えなくてすみません。</span>／<span class="translation">I was glad to receive your kind invitation, but I’m sorry I won’t be able to visit.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>せっかくいい<ruby><rb>天気</rb><rt>てん き</rt></ruby>なのに、かぜをひいてどこにも<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>けない。</span>／<span class="translation">Despite the nice weather, I can’t go anywhere because I’ve caught a cold.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>せっかくセーターを<ruby><rb>編</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>んであげたのに、どうも<ruby><rb>気</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>にいらないようだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Even though I went to the effort of knitting a sweater for him, he doesn’t seem to like it.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>せっかく<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>ていただいても<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なに</rt></ruby>もお<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はな</rt></ruby>しすることはありません。</span>／<span class="translation">I don’t have anything to say to you, even if you make the effort to come all the way here.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>今回</rb><rt>こん かい</rt></ruby>のクイズには<ruby><rb>多数</rb><rt>た すう</rt></ruby>のおはがきをお<ruby><rb>寄</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>せいただきました。ただせっかくお<ruby><rb>送</rb><rt>おく</rt></ruby>りいただきましても、<ruby><rb>締切日</rb><rt>しめ きり び</rt></ruby>をすぎておりますものは<ruby><rb>抽選</rb><rt>ちゅう せん</rt></ruby>できませんのでご<ruby><rb>了承</rb><rt>りょう しょう</rt></ruby>ください。</span>／<span class="translation">Thank you for the many postcards we’ve received for this quiz. However, please understand that those sent after the deadline cannot be used in the draw.</span></div><div class="explanation">The patterns せっかくXのにY and せっかくXてもY have the same meaning as せっかく...けれども. ...のに shows that X refers to a situation that has been realized, and ...ても shows that X refers to a hypothetical situation.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x24501"><span class="number">6. </span>せっかくのN</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>せっかくの<ruby><rb>日曜日</rb><rt>にち よう び</rt></ruby>なのに、<ruby><rb>一日中</rb><rt>いち にち じゅう</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>雨</rb><rt>あめ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>降</rb><rt>ふ</rt></ruby>っている。</span>／<span class="translation">Here it is Sunday, and wouldn’t you know it, it’s raining all day.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>せっかくのチャンスを<ruby><rb>逃</rb><rt>のが</rt></ruby>してしまった。</span>／<span class="translation">I let a rare opportunity slip away.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>せっかくの<ruby><rb>努力</rb><rt>ど りょく</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>水</rb><rt>みず</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>泡</rb><rt>あわ</rt></ruby>になってしまった。</span>／<span class="translation">All my efforts came to nothing.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>せっかくのごちそうなのだから、<ruby><rb>残</rb><rt>のこ</rt></ruby>さないで<ruby><rb>全部</rb><rt>ぜん ぶ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べましょう。</span>／<span class="translation">Since it’s such a feast, let’s eat it all up and not leave a crumb.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used with nouns that describe an action involving a fortunate opportunity or an effort. Expresses a feeling of regret for not being able to utilize the opportunity/effort, or a feeling of hope or expectation that it should be utilized.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x24538"><span class="number">7. </span>せっかく+<ruby><rb>連</rb><rt>れん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>体</rb><rt>たい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>修</rb><rt>しゅう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>飾</rb><rt>しょく</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>句</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>+N</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>せっかく<ruby><rb>書</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>いた<ruby><rb>原稿</rb><rt>げん こう</rt></ruby>をなくしてしまった。</span>／<span class="translation">I’ve lost the draft that I worked so hard to write.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>せっかく<ruby><rb>覚</rb><rt>おぼ</rt></ruby>えた<ruby><rb>英語</rb><rt>えい ご</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>使</rb><rt>つか</rt></ruby>う<ruby><rb>機会</rb><rt>き かい</rt></ruby>がない。</span>／<span class="translation">Despite the effort I put into learning English, I have no opportunity to use it now.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>せっかくきれいに<ruby><rb>咲</rb><rt>さ</rt></ruby>いた<ruby><rb>花</rb><rt>はな</rt></ruby>をだれかが<ruby><rb>取</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>っていった。</span>／<span class="translation">Someone plucked the flower that was blooming so beautifully.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>せっかく<ruby><rb>作</rb><rt>つく</rt></ruby>った<ruby><rb>料理</rb><rt>りょう り</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>誰</rb><rt>だれ</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べてくれない。</span>／<span class="translation">Despite the effort I put into cooking this meal, no one’s eating it.</span></div><div class="explanation">Indicates an action made possible by good fortune or one’s own efforts. Expresses a feeling of regret for not being able to utilize the opportunity/effort, or a feeling of hope or expectation that it should be utilized.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x24575"><span class="number">8. </span>せっかくですが</h2><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><span class="number">A:</span>もう<ruby><rb>遅</rb><rt>おそ</rt></ruby>いですから、<ruby><rb>泊</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>まっていらしたらいかがですか。</span>／<span class="translation">It’s already late, so why don’t you stay overnight?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>せっかくですが、あしたは<ruby><rb>朝</rb><rt>あさ</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>用事</rb><rt>よう じ</rt></ruby>がありますので。</span>／<span class="translation">Thank you, but tomorrow I have things to do starting in the morning.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>今晩</rb><rt>こん ばん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>一緒</rb><rt>いっ しょ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>食事</rb><rt>しょく じ</rt></ruby>しない？</span>／<span class="translation">Shall we have dinner together tonight?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>せっかくだけど、<ruby><rb>今晩</rb><rt>こん ばん</rt></ruby>はちょっと<ruby><rb>都合</rb><rt>つ ごう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>悪</rb><rt>わる</rt></ruby>いんだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Thanks, but tonight’s just not convenient.</span></div><div class="explanation">せっかくですが and せっかくだけど are used to preface the refusal of an offer or proposal made by someone else.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x24624"><span class="number">9. </span>せっかくですから</h2><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>食事</rb><rt>しょく じ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>準備</rb><rt>じゅん び</rt></ruby>がしてありますので、うちで<ruby><rb>召</rb><rt>め</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>がってくださいよ。</span>／<span class="translation">Dinner is ready, so by all means, please stay and eat with us.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>せっかくですから、お<ruby><rb>言葉</rb><rt>こと ば</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>甘</rb><rt>あま</rt></ruby>えて、そうさせていただきます。</span>／<span class="translation">That’s very kind of you. I will take you up on your generous offer.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>せっかくだから、あなたの<ruby><rb>作</rb><rt>つく</rt></ruby>ったケーキご<ruby><rb>馳走</rb><rt>ち そう</rt></ruby>になって<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>くわ。</span>／<span class="translation">Since you went to all the trouble of baking a cake, I won’t leave without trying it.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to preface the acceptance of an offer or proposal made by someone else.</div></body></html>