<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>てたまらない</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0465.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【てしょうがない】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0467.xhtml">【てちょうだい】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x42081">【てたまらない】</h1><h4 class="info">［Na でたまらない］</h4><h4 class="info">［A-くてたまらない］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>今日</rb><rt>きょう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>暑</rb><rt>あつ</rt></ruby>くてたまらない。</span>／<span class="translation">Today is so hot I can’t stand it.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>この<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>はやめたくてたまらないが、<ruby><rb>事情</rb><rt>じ じょう</rt></ruby>があってやめられないのだ。</span>／<span class="translation">I want to quit this job more than anything, but there are reasons I just can’t.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>会</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>いたくてたまらない。</span>／<span class="translation">I can’t wait to see her.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>ショーウィンドーに<ruby><rb>飾</rb><rt>かざ</rt></ruby>ってあった<ruby><rb>帽子</rb><rt>ぼう し</rt></ruby>がほしくてたまらなかったから、もう<ruby><rb>一度</rb><rt>いち ど</rt></ruby>その<ruby><rb>店</rb><rt>みせ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ったんです。</span>／<span class="translation">There was a hat in the show window that I really wanted, so I went back to that store one more time.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>はじめての<ruby><rb>海外旅行</rb><rt>かい がい りょ こう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>中止</rb><rt>ちゅう し</rt></ruby>になってしまった。<ruby><rb>残念</rb><rt>ざん ねん</rt></ruby>でたまらない。</span>／<span class="translation">My first overseas trip has been canceled. I am so disappointed.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span>うちの<ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>試合</rb><rt>し あい</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>負</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>けたのがくやしくてたまらないようです。</span>／<span class="translation">It seems our child just can’t get over losing the game.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses a strong feeling, sensation, or want on the part of the speaker. For example, (1) is similar to “It is really hot.” Has approximately the same meaning as てしかたがない. Comments concerning the condition of a third person are accompanied by ようだ, そうだ, or らしい, as in (6).</div></body></html>