<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>お...なさる</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0086.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【お...なさい】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0088.xhtml">【お...になる】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x7823">【お...なさる】</h1><h4 class="info">［おR-なさる］</h4><h4 class="info">［ごNなさる］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>あの<ruby><rb>先生</rb><rt>せん せい</rt></ruby>がお<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はな</rt></ruby>しなさったことは、<ruby><rb>多</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>くの<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>たちにとって<ruby><rb>生</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>きていく<ruby><rb>心</rb><rt>こころ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>支</rb><rt>ささ</rt></ruby>えとなるだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">What the teacher said will be a real comfort to many people in their lives.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>ケニアへはいつご<ruby><rb>出発</rb><rt>しゅっ ぱつ</rt></ruby>なさるんですか。</span>／<span class="translation">When are you going to depart for Kenya?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>今度</rb><rt>こん ど</rt></ruby>あなたがその<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>かた</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>達</rb><rt>たち</rt></ruby>とお<ruby><rb>食事</rb><rt>しょく じ</rt></ruby>なさるときにでも、<ruby><rb>一度</rb><rt>いち ど</rt></ruby>ご<ruby><rb>一緒</rb><rt>いっ しょ</rt></ruby>させていただけるとうれしいのですが。</span>／<span class="translation">I would be delighted if I could accompany you sometime when you have dinner with them again.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>どうぞ、お<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べなさい。</span>／<span class="translation">Please go ahead and eat. (Please help yourself.)</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>明子</rb><rt>あき こ</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>自己紹介</rb><rt>じ こ しょう かい</rt></ruby>なさい。</span>／<span class="translation">Akiko, introduce yourself.</span></div><div class="explanation">Takes either verb stems or nouns of Chinese origin that express an action. An honorific expression, like おR-になる. When used with a verb stem in expressions like お話しなさる ((someone of higher status) speaks) or お食べなさる ((someone of higher status) eats), it sounds a little old-fashioned. When used with a Chinese-origin noun, as in (2), it usually takes the form ごNなさる. When used with なさい (do something, imperative), as in (4) and (5), it is a polite imperative. However, in this case it is not used when talking to a person of higher status. </div></body></html>