<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>なまじ</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0704.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【なにより】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0706.xhtml">【なら<sub class="variation">1</sub>】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x64810">【なまじ】</h1><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>なまじ<ruby><rb>急</rb><rt>いそ</rt></ruby>いでタクシーに<ruby><rb>乗</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>ったために、<ruby><rb>渋滞</rb><rt>じゅう たい</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>巻</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>込</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>まれてかえって<ruby><rb>遅刻</rb><rt>ち こく</rt></ruby>してしまった。</span>／<span class="translation">Because I was in a rush and jumped into a taxi, I ended up getting caught in a traffic jam and arriving late.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>段階</rb><rt>だん かい</rt></ruby>でなまじ<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>発言</rb><rt>はつ げん</rt></ruby>すれば、かえって<ruby><rb>事態</rb><rt>じ たい</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>混乱</rb><rt>こん らん</rt></ruby>させることになりかねない。</span>／<span class="translation">If I were to make an incomplete comment at this stage, it would only confuse the situation. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>なまじ<ruby><rb>自信</rb><rt>じ しん</rt></ruby>があったのがわざわいして、<ruby><rb>重大</rb><rt>じゅう だい</rt></ruby>なミスを<ruby><rb>犯</rb><rt>おか</rt></ruby>してしまった。</span>／<span class="translation">Overconfidence in my own ability led me to make to a serious mistake.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>なまじ<ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>状況</rb><rt>じょう きょう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>理解</rb><rt>り かい</rt></ruby>できるだけに、こんな<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>はとても<ruby><rb>頼</rb><rt>たの</rt></ruby>みづらい。</span>／<span class="translation">It’s because I understand her current situation that it’s hard to ask her to take this job on. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>なまじの<ruby><rb>知識</rb><rt>ち しき</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>役</rb><rt>やく</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>立</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>たないどころか<ruby><rb>邪魔</rb><rt>じゃ ま</rt></ruby>になることもある。</span>／<span class="translation">A little knowledge is not just useless; it can even be a hindrance. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>前</rb><rt>まえ</rt></ruby>ではなまじなことは<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>わない<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>ほう</rt></ruby>がいい。<ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>はこの<ruby><rb>問題</rb><rt>もん だい</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>徹底的</rb><rt>てっ てい てき</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>調</rb><rt>しら</rt></ruby>べているらしいから、<ruby><rb>我々</rb><rt>われ われ</rt></ruby>もそのつもりで<ruby><rb>準備</rb><rt>じゅん び</rt></ruby>しなければ<ruby><rb>負</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>けてしまう。</span>／<span class="translation">We shouldn’t say anything half-baked in front of her. It sounds like she’s been investigating this problem thoroughly, so if we don’t prepare with that in mind, we’ll be outplayed.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses a situation in which something positive ends inconclusively or only halfway, without displaying its full value. Used to say that something with an intrinsically positive value actually results in a negative outcome.</div><div class="explanation">When なまじ modifies a noun, it is used in the patterns なまじのN and なまじなN, as in (5) and (6). In these cases, なまじ can be replaced by 中途半端な (halfway, unfinished). For instance, (5) means that knowledge, which is usually a good thing to have, instead becomes a hindrance because it is superficial.</div></body></html>