<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ながら</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0669.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ながす】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0671.xhtml">【なきゃ】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x61982">【ながら】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x61987"><span class="number">1. </span>R-ながら〈simultaneity〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>音楽</rb><rt>おん がく</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>聴</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>きながら<ruby><rb>勉強</rb><rt>べん きょう</rt></ruby>や<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>をする<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>のことを「ながら<ruby><rb>族</rb><rt>ぞく</rt></ruby>」という。</span>／<span class="translation">People who listen to music while studying or working are called <i>n</i><i>agarazoku</i>.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>その<ruby><rb>辺</rb><rt>へん</rt></ruby>でお<ruby><rb>茶</rb><rt>ちゃ</rt></ruby>でも<ruby><rb>飲</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>みながら<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はな</rt></ruby>しましょう。</span>／<span class="translation">Let’s talk somewhere over a cup of tea or something.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>母</rb><rt>はは</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>鼻歌</rb><rt>はな うた</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>歌</rb><rt>うた</rt></ruby>いながら<ruby><rb>夕飯</rb><rt>ゆう はん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>用意</rb><rt>よう い</rt></ruby>をしている。</span>／<span class="translation">My mother is humming a song while preparing dinner.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>よそ<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>をしながら<ruby><rb>運転</rb><rt>うん てん</rt></ruby>するのは<ruby><rb>危険</rb><rt>き けん</rt></ruby>です。</span>／<span class="translation">It’s dangerous to take your eyes off the road while driving.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>飛行機</rb><rt>ひ こう き</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>黒煙</rb><rt>こく えん</rt></ruby>をあげながら<ruby><rb>真</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>っ<ruby><rb>逆</rb><rt>さか</rt></ruby>さまに<ruby><rb>墜落</rb><rt>つい らく</rt></ruby>して<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>った。</span>／<span class="translation">The airplane was trailing thick black smoke as it went into a nosedive.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>液体</rb><rt>えき たい</rt></ruby>はぶくぶくとガスを<ruby><rb>発生</rb><rt>はっ せい</rt></ruby>させながら<ruby><rb>発酵</rb><rt>はっ こう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>続</rb><rt>つづ</rt></ruby>けている。</span>／<span class="translation">The liquid is generating bubbles of gas as it continues to ferment.</span></div><div class="explanation">Links two verbs in a sentence and expresses that two actions are proceeding concurrently. In this usage, the second verb presents the main action of the sentence, and the first verb (in the <i>nagara</i> clause) presents a secondary action that depicts the circumstances in which the main action is carried out. For instance, in (1), “studying or working” is the main action, and it is accompanied by the action of “listening to music.” In the same way, the incorrect ながら sentence below means that the action of getting on the train and the action of reading the book were carried out simultaneously. It cannot be interpreted to mean that the subject was reading a book on the train.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>電車に乗りながら本を読んだ。／I read a book while I was boarding the train.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>電車に乗って本を読んだ。／I got on the train and read a book.</div><div class="explanation">Both of the verbs must have the same subject (see incorrect example below), and in most cases they refer to the intentional actions of a person. However, as illustrated in (5) and (6), in some cases the subject may be an airplane, a natural phenomenon, or something else capable of moving or changing by virtue of its own power.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>私は本を読みながら、彼はウイスキーを飲んだ。／While I was reading a book, he drank whiskey.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x62084"><span class="number">2. </span>...ながら〈appearance, manner〉</h2><h4 class="info">［Nながら］</h4><h4 class="info">［R-ながら］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>いつもながら<ruby><rb>見事</rb><rt>み ごと</rt></ruby>なお<ruby><rb>手並</rb><rt>て な</rt></ruby>みですね。</span>／<span class="translation">Your work is marvelous, as always.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>この<ruby><rb>清酒</rb><rt>せい しゅ</rt></ruby>メーカーは、<ruby><rb>昔</rb><rt>むかし</rt></ruby>ながらの<ruby><rb>製法</rb><rt>せいほう</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>日本酒</rb><rt>に ほん しゅ</rt></ruby>をつくっている。</span>／<span class="translation">This refined <i>sake</i> maker uses the traditional method of manufacture.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>被害者</rb><rt>ひ がい しゃ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>涙</rb><rt>なみだ</rt></ruby>ながらに<ruby><rb>事件</rb><rt>じ けん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>状況</rb><rt>じょう きょう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>語</rb><rt>かた</rt></ruby>った。</span>／<span class="translation">In tears, the victim related the circumstances of the incident.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>生</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>まれながらのすぐれた<ruby><rb>才能</rb><rt>さい のう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>恵</rb><rt>めぐ</rt></ruby>まれている。</span>／<span class="translation">She is gifted with a great natural talent.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>この<ruby><rb>子</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>生</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>まれながらにして<ruby><rb>優</rb><rt>すぐ</rt></ruby>れた<ruby><rb>音楽的</rb><rt>おんがくてき</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>感性</rb><rt>かんせい</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>備</rb><rt>そな</rt></ruby>えている。</span>／<span class="translation">This child was born with exceptional musical sensibility.</span></div><div class="explanation">When attached to a noun or the stem of some verbs, ながら expresses a state or situation that continues as it is without change. For instance, 生まれながら and 昔ながら mean “just as it is, ever since a certain time,” and these expressions are similar to 生まれつき (by nature) and 昔のまま (as it was before), respectively. 涙ながらに means “in a tearful state” and can be replaced by 涙を流して (weeping). Expressions that exemplify this usage are relatively fixed, and only a small number of words, including those in the examples above, can precede ながら.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x62137"><span class="number">3. </span>...ながら（も／に）〈adversative connective〉</h2><h4 class="info">［N／Na　ながら］</h4><h4 class="info">［A-いながら］</h4><h4 class="info">［R-ながら］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>このバイクは<ruby><rb>小型</rb><rt>こ がた</rt></ruby>ながら<ruby><rb>馬力</rb><rt>ば りき</rt></ruby>がある。</span>／<span class="translation">In spite of its small size, this motorbike has impressive horsepower.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>敵</rb><rt>てき</rt></ruby>ながらあっぱれな<ruby><rb>態度</rb><rt>たい ど</rt></ruby>であった。</span>／<span class="translation">Although he was my foe, I must admit he behaved admirably.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>ながらになかなかしっかりとした<ruby><rb>挨拶</rb><rt>あい さつ</rt></ruby>であった。</span>／<span class="translation">That was quite a good speech, for a child.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>残念</rb><rt>ざん ねん</rt></ruby>ながら、<ruby><rb>結婚式</rb><rt>けっ こん しき</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>出席</rb><rt>しゅっ せき</rt></ruby>できません。</span>／<span class="translation">Unfortunately, I will not be able to attend the wedding.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>狭</rb><rt>せま</rt></ruby>いながらもようやく<ruby><rb>自分</rb><rt>じ ぶん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>持</rb><rt>も</rt></ruby>ち<ruby><rb>家</rb><rt>いえ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>手</rb><rt>て</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>れることができた。</span>／<span class="translation">Cramped as it was, I was finally able to get my own home.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なに</rt></ruby>もかも<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>っていながら<ruby><rb>教</rb><rt>おし</rt></ruby>えてくれない。</span>／<span class="translation">Even though he knows everything, he won’t tell me.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（7）</span>すぐ<ruby><rb>近</rb><rt>ちか</rt></ruby>くまで<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>きながら、<ruby><rb>結局</rb><rt>けっ きょく</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>実家</rb><rt>じっ か</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>寄</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>らずに<ruby><rb>帰</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>って<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>た。</span>／<span class="translation">I was in my parents’ neighborhood, but I ended up coming home without dropping by.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（8）</span><ruby><rb>学生</rb><rt>がく せい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>身分</rb><rt>み ぶん</rt></ruby>でありながら、<ruby><rb>高級車</rb><rt>こう きゅう しゃ</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>通学</rb><rt>つう がく</rt></ruby>している。</span>／<span class="translation">Even though she’s a student, she travels to school in a luxury car.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（9）</span><ruby><rb>細々</rb><rt>ほそ ぼそ</rt></ruby>ながらも<ruby><rb>商売</rb><rt>しょう ばい</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>続</rb><rt>つづ</rt></ruby>けている。</span>／<span class="translation">We’re continuing to run our business, although we’re just scraping by.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（10）</span>ゆっくりながらも<ruby><rb>作業</rb><rt>さ ぎょう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>少</rb><rt>すこ</rt></ruby>しずつ<ruby><rb>進</rb><rt>すす</rt></ruby>んでいる。</span>／<span class="translation">Although it’s going very slowly, the work is progressing little by little.</span></div><div class="explanation">When ながら is attached to a noun, an <i>i</i>- or <i>na</i>-adjective, a verb stem, or an adverb (without と or に, in the case of adverbs that usually take these particles), it expresses the meaning of contradiction or opposition, similar to ...のに or ...けれども／が. It can also be combined with the particle も and used in the form ながらも. ながらに, as in (3), sounds old-fashioned and is not normally used in colloquial speech. In this so-called “adversative” usage, ながら is usually preceded by a stative predicate. On the other hand, in Usage 1, which presents “parallel/simultaneous” actions, ながら must be preceded and followed by action verbs.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x62222"><span class="number">4. </span>...とはいいながら<span class="reference">→<a href="part0614.xhtml#idtitlex1x58415">【とはいいながら】</a></span></h2></body></html>