<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>けっか</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0198.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【げ】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0200.xhtml">【けっきょく】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x15918">【けっか】</h1><h4 class="info">［N のけっか］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-たけっか］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>投票</rb><rt>とう ひょう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>結果</rb><rt>けっ か</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>議長</rb><rt>ぎ ちょう</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>山田</rb><rt>やま だ</rt></ruby>さんが<ruby><rb>選出</rb><rt>せん しゅつ</rt></ruby>された。</span>／<span class="translation">The result of the vote was that Yamada-san was selected as the chairperson. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>調</rb><rt>しら</rt></ruby>べた<ruby><rb>結果</rb><rt>けっ か</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>がまちがっていることがわかりました。</span>／<span class="translation">My investigations showed that I was in the wrong. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>3<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>にん</rt></ruby>でよく<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はな</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>合</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>った<ruby><rb>結果</rb><rt>けっ か</rt></ruby>、その<ruby><rb>問題</rb><rt>もん だい</rt></ruby>についてはもうすこし<ruby><rb>様子</rb><rt>よう す</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>ようということになった。</span>／<span class="translation">After discussing it amongst the three of us, the decision was to let the issue lie for a bit longer and see what happens. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>国会</rb><rt>こっ かい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>審議</rb><rt>しん ぎ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>空転</rb><rt>くう てん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>結果</rb><rt>けっ か</rt></ruby>、この<ruby><rb>法案</rb><rt>ほう あん</rt></ruby>がこの<ruby><rb>会期中</rb><rt>かい き ちゅう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>採決</rb><rt>さい けつ</rt></ruby>される<ruby><rb>見通</rb><rt>み とお</rt></ruby>しはなくなった。</span>／<span class="translation">As a result of the stalled Diet deliberations, there is no longer any prospect of this bill being adopted during the current session. </span></div><div class="explanation">Although 結果 (result) is basically a noun, as in 調べた結果を教えてください(Please tell me the results of your investigation), it can be used as an expression to link cause and effect, as shown in the examples above. Combined with an expression that describes the cause, it means “for that reason” or “because of such-and-such.” Followed by a description of the resulting effect. Used more in written language. </div></body></html>