<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>によると</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0841.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【による】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0843.xhtml">【によれば】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x74989">【によると】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x74991"><span class="number">1. </span>Nによると</h2><h3 class="subsubtitle" id="idsubsubtitlex1x74994"><span class="number">a. </span>Nによると</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>天気</rb><rt>てん き</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>予報</rb><rt>よ ほう</rt></ruby>によると、<ruby><rb>明日</rb><rt>あ す</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>晴</rb><rt>は</rt></ruby>れるそうです。</span>／<span class="translation">According to the weather forecast, it will be sunny tomorrow. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>説明</rb><rt>せつ めい</rt></ruby>によると、この<ruby><rb>機械</rb><rt>き かい</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>廃棄物</rb><rt>はい き ぶつ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>処理</rb><rt>しょ り</rt></ruby>するためのものだということです。</span>／<span class="translation">According to his explanation, this machine is for the disposal of waste. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>あの<ruby><rb>雲</rb><rt>くも</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>様子</rb><rt>よう す</rt></ruby>によると、<ruby><rb>明日</rb><rt>あ す</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>多分</rb><rt>た ぶん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>晴</rb><rt>は</rt></ruby>れるだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">Judging from those clouds, I think it will probably be sunny tomorrow.</span></div><div class="explanation">Indicates a source from which the speaker has heard something, or a basis from which the speaker infers something. Followed by an expression of hearsay such as ...そうだ (I hear/they say) or ...ということだ (they say), or a suppositional expression such as ...だろう (probably), ...らしい (apparently), etc. In (1) and (2), it would also be possible to use ...によれば.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x75025"><span class="number">b. </span>ことによると／ばあいによると</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>ことによると<ruby><rb>今回</rb><rt>こん かい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>旅行</rb><rt>りょ こう</rt></ruby>はキャンセルしなければならないかもしれない。</span>／<span class="translation">It may turn out that I’ll have to cancel the upcoming trip.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>場合</rb><rt>ば あい</rt></ruby>によると<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>らも<ruby><rb>応援</rb><rt>おう えん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>てくれるかもしれない。</span>／<span class="translation">Depending on the situation, they might come to help us.</span></div><div class="explanation">Fixed, idiomatic expressions with the meaning of “maybe, perhaps” or “under certain conditions.” Followed by a suppositional expression. Also used in the forms ことによったら and 場合によったら. </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x75050"><span class="number">2. </span>Vところによると</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>聞</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>いたところによると、<ruby><rb>最近</rb><rt>さい きん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>飛行機</rb><rt>ひ こう き</rt></ruby>でいく<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>ほう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>電車</rb><rt>でん しゃ</rt></ruby>より<ruby><rb>安</rb><rt>やす</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>場合</rb><rt>ば あい</rt></ruby>もあるそうですね。</span>／<span class="translation">From what I’ve heard, you know, these days flying can sometimes be cheaper than going by train.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>主張</rb><rt>しゅ ちょう</rt></ruby>するところによると、<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>事件</rb><rt>じ けん</rt></ruby>とは<ruby><rb>関係</rb><rt>かん けい</rt></ruby>ないということだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Based on what he claims, he has nothing to do with the incident.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>祖父</rb><rt>そ ふ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>語</rb><rt>かた</rt></ruby>ったところによると、このあたりには<ruby><rb>昔</rb><rt>むかし</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>古</rb><rt>ふる</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>農家</rb><rt>のう か</rt></ruby>があったということだ。</span>／<span class="translation">According to what my grandfather told me, there used to be old farmhouses around here a long time ago. </span></div><div class="explanation">Indicates a source from which the speaker has heard something, or the basis for a judgment. Followed by an expression of hearsay, such as ...そうだ (I hear/they say) or ...ということだ (they say), or an expression of judgment, such as a supposition or assertion. Also used in the form ...ところによれば.</div></body></html>