<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ずにはすまない</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0303.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ずにはおかない】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0305.xhtml">【すまない】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x23249">【ずにはすまない】</h1><h4 class="info">［V-ずにはすまない］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>あいつはこの<ruby><rb>頃</rb><rt>ごろ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>怠</rb><rt>なま</rt></ruby>けてばかりだ。<ruby><rb>一言</rb><rt>ひと こと</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>わずにはすまない。</span>／<span class="translation">He’s been so lazy these days. I can’t help saying something to him.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>親</rb><rt>しん</rt></ruby>せきみんなが<ruby><rb>出席</rb><rt>しゅっ せき</rt></ruby>するのなら、うちも<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>かずにはすまないだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">If all the relatives are attending, we probably have no choice but to go.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>意図</rb><rt>い と</rt></ruby>したわけではなかったとは<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>え、それだけ<ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>傷</rb><rt>きず</rt></ruby>つけてしまったのなら、<ruby><rb>謝</rb><rt>あやま</rt></ruby>らずにはすまないのではないか。</span>／<span class="translation">Even if you didn’t mean to, if you’ve hurt her that badly, you can’t get by without making an apology, can you?</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses the meaning “can’t help but do,” “unacceptable if not done.” A formal expression.</div></body></html>