<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>をものともせずに</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part1080.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【をもとに】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part1082.xhtml">【をよぎなくさせる】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x108240">【をものともせずに】</h1><h4 class="info">［Nをものともせずに］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>らのヨットは、<ruby><rb>嵐</rb><rt>あらし</rt></ruby>をものともせずに、<ruby><rb>荒海</rb><rt>あら うみ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>渡</rb><rt>わた</rt></ruby>り<ruby><rb>切</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>った。</span>／<span class="translation">In defiance of the storm, their yacht finished crossing the rough sea.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>ばくだいな<ruby><rb>借金</rb><rt>しゃっ きん</rt></ruby>をものともせずに、<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>社長</rb><rt>しゃ ちょう</rt></ruby>になることを<ruby><rb>引</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>受</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>け、<ruby><rb>事業</rb><rt>じ ぎょう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>立派</rb><rt>りっ ぱ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>立</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>ち<ruby><rb>直</rb><rt>なお</rt></ruby>らせた。</span>／<span class="translation">In the face of huge debts, he accepted the position of president, and recovered the company’s position splendidly.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>周囲</rb><rt>しゅう い</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>批判</rb><rt>ひ はん</rt></ruby>をものともせずに、<ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>自分</rb><rt>じ ぶん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>信念</rb><rt>しん ねん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>貫</rb><rt>つらぬ</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>通</rb><rt>とお</rt></ruby>した。</span>／<span class="translation">In the face of criticism from those around her, she stuck to her beliefs.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “to face up to severe conditions.” Expressions of problem solving come afterwards. It is a written expression.</div></body></html>