<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>にどと...ない</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0812.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【にとって】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0814.xhtml">【にとどまらず】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x73199">【にどと...ない】</h1><h4 class="info">［にどとV-ない］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>こんな<ruby><rb>恐</rb><rt>おそ</rt></ruby>ろしい<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>いは<ruby><rb>二度</rb><rt>に ど</rt></ruby>としたくない。</span>／<span class="translation">I never want to have such a horrible experience.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>同</rb><rt>おな</rt></ruby>じ<ruby><rb>間違</rb><rt>ま ちが</rt></ruby>いは<ruby><rb>二度</rb><rt>に ど</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>犯</rb><rt>おか</rt></ruby>さないようにしましょう。</span>／<span class="translation">Let’s not make the same mistake again.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>こんなチャンスは<ruby><rb>二度</rb><rt>に ど</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>訪</rb><rt>おとず</rt></ruby>れないだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">This will be the chance of a lifetime.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>あんなサービスの<ruby><rb>悪</rb><rt>わる</rt></ruby>いレストランには<ruby><rb>二度</rb><rt>に ど</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>きたくない。</span>／<span class="translation">I never ever want to go back to that restaurant with such poor service. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>別</rb><rt>わか</rt></ruby>れたら、あの<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>にはもう<ruby><rb>二度</rb><rt>に ど</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>会</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>えないかもしれない。</span>／<span class="translation">If I leave him now, I may not be able to see him any more. </span></div><div class="explanation">Used to negate something firmly, such as 絶対に...ない(never do...) and 決して繰り返さない(never to repeat).</div></body></html>