<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>なければ</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0681.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【なけりゃ】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0683.xhtml">【なさい】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x62784">【なければ】</h1><h4 class="info">［N／Na　でなければ］</h4><h4 class="info">［A-くなければ］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-なければ］</h4><div class="explanation">When the verb する is used with this expression, it may take the form せねば, in addition to the usual form しなければ. In spoken Japanese, なけりゃ and/or なきゃ may also be used.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x62802"><span class="number">1. </span>...なければ...ない</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>この<ruby><rb>映画</rb><rt>えい が</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>成人</rb><rt>せい じん</rt></ruby>でなければ<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>ることができない。</span>／<span class="translation">You can’t watch this movie unless you’re an adult.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>体</rb><rt>からだ</rt></ruby>がじょうぶでなければこの<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>はつとまらない。</span>／<span class="translation">You must have a strong physical constitution to carry out this task. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>はワープロでなければ<ruby><rb>論文</rb><rt>ろん ぶん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>書</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>けない。</span>／<span class="translation">I can’t write an academic paper without a word processor.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>背</rb><rt>せ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>高</rb><rt>たか</rt></ruby>くなければファッションモデルにはなれない。</span>／<span class="translation">You can’t be a fashion model unless you’re tall. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>安</rb><rt>やす</rt></ruby>くなければ<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>わない。</span>／<span class="translation">I won’t buy it unless it’s inexpensive.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>勉強</rb><rt>べん きょう</rt></ruby>しなければ<ruby><rb>大学</rb><rt>だい がく</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>はい</rt></ruby>れない。</span>／<span class="translation">You can’t get into university unless you study hard.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（7）</span><ruby><rb>君</rb><rt>きみ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>手伝</rb><rt>て つだ</rt></ruby>ってくれなければこの<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>完成</rb><rt>かん せい</rt></ruby>しない。</span>／<span class="translation">I won’t be able to finish this job without your help.</span></div><div class="explanation">なければ is used in combination with the negative form of a verb or a negative expression such as 無理だ (impossible/unreasonable) or むずかしい (difficult) at the end of the sentence. It means that when one situation or event is not realized, another situation or event is not realized either. It is also possible to say なくては...ない.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x62857"><span class="number">2. </span>...なければいけない</h2><h3 class="subsubtitle" id="idparagraphx1x62860"><span class="number"></span>...なければならない</h3><h3 class="subsubtitle" id="idparagraphx1x62863"><span class="number"></span>...なければだめだ</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>教師</rb><rt>きょう し</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>生徒</rb><rt>せい と</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>対</rb><rt>たい</rt></ruby>して<ruby><rb>公平</rb><rt>こう へい</rt></ruby>でなければならない。</span>／<span class="translation">Teachers have to be fair to students.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>そろそろ<ruby><rb>帰</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>らなければいけません。</span>／<span class="translation">It’s about time to go home.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>もっと<ruby><rb>自分</rb><rt>じ ぶん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>大切</rb><rt>たい せつ</rt></ruby>にしなければだめですよ。</span>／<span class="translation">You’ve got to look out for yourself more.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means that it is necessary, essential, or obligatory to be or do something. The second clause can be omitted, as below.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>もう 10 時だから、そろそろ帰らなければ。／It’s already ten o’clock, so I should head home pretty soon.</div><div class="explanation">なければいけない can sometimes be replaced by なくてはいけない, なくてはならない, or なくてはだめだ. However, there are some differences between these expressions, as explained below.</div><div class="explanation">なければならない and なくてはならない mean that it is obligatory or necessary to be or do something, in light of conventional social wisdom or the nature of the thing in question. These expressions are usually used to state widely-held views that all people have the obligation or need to do a certain thing. On the other hand, なければいけない and なくてはいけない are often used when particular circumstances oblige or necessitate a certain action. なければだめだ and なくてはだめだ are similar to なければいけない and なくてはいけない, but the first two are more colloquial in tone.</div><div class="explanation">When なければ is replaced by ねば, and ならない by ならぬ, the result is a more formal expression usually used in written Japanese.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>人生には我慢せねばならぬこともある。／In life, there are some things that you must endure.</div><div class="explanation">Also, ならん and いかん are sometimes used instead of ならない and いけない, respectively, but the former are colloquial forms that sound rather old-fashioned.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>優勝するには、もっと志気を高めなければならん。／We must boost the morale of the team in order to win.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>少しぐらいつらくても、我慢しなければいかんよ。／Even if things are a little difficult, you must be patient.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x62970"><span class="number">3. </span>...なければV-た</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>助</rb><rt>たす</rt></ruby>けてくれなければこの<ruby><rb>本</rb><rt>ほん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>完成</rb><rt>かん せい</rt></ruby>しなかっただろう。</span>／<span class="translation">Without his help, this book would not have been completed.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>金</rb><rt>かね</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>目当</rb><rt>めあ</rt></ruby>てでなければ、<ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>はあんな<ruby><rb>老人</rb><rt>ろう じん</rt></ruby>とは<ruby><rb>結婚</rb><rt>けっ こん</rt></ruby>しなかったに<ruby><rb>違</rb><rt>ちが</rt></ruby>いない。</span>／<span class="translation">I’m sure she wouldn’t have married such an old man if she hadn’t been after his money. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>あの<ruby><rb>一言</rb><rt>ひと こと</rt></ruby>さえなければ<ruby><rb>別</rb><rt>わか</rt></ruby>れることにはならなかったのに。</span>／<span class="translation">If I hadn’t said that one thing, I know we wouldn’t have broken up.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>あのミスさえしていなければ<ruby><rb>合格</rb><rt>ごう かく</rt></ruby>できたはずなのに。</span>／<span class="translation">If I hadn’t made that mistake, I could have passed the exam.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>体</rb><rt>からだ</rt></ruby>がこんなに<ruby><rb>弱</rb><rt>よわ</rt></ruby>くなければ<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>続</rb><rt>つづ</rt></ruby>けられたのに。</span>／<span class="translation">If my health were not so poor, I could have continued working. </span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses the counter-factual meaning that if the circumstances had been different, there would also have been a different result. This pattern is often used in combination with sentence-final expressions such as だろう (I suppose), にちがいない (there is no doubt that...), はずだ (should be/do), and のに (I wish/if only...). </div></body></html>