<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>とにかく</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0610.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【となれば】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0612.xhtml">【との】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x57989">【とにかく】</h1><div class="explanation">Used to put aside discussion of a certain matter or action for the time being in order to focus on another matter or action. The form ともかく is also used.  </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x58001"><span class="number">1. </span>とにかく</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>あの<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>はとにかく<ruby><rb>大変</rb><rt>たい へん</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>秀才</rb><rt>しゅう さい</rt></ruby>です。</span>／<span class="translation">At any rate, she’s exceptionally bright.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>田中</rb><rt>た なか</rt></ruby>さんの<ruby><rb>新</rb><rt>あたら</rt></ruby>しい<ruby><rb>家</rb><rt>いえ</rt></ruby>、とにかくすごく<ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>きい<ruby><rb>家</rb><rt>いえ</rt></ruby>なんですよ。</span>／<span class="translation">You know Tanaka-san’s new house—whatever else you might say about it, it's incredibly huge!</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>戦闘</rb><rt>せん とう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>後</rb><rt>あと</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>町</rb><rt>まち</rt></ruby>は、とにかくひどい<ruby><rb>状況</rb><rt>じょう きょう</rt></ruby>です。</span>／<span class="translation">Now that the battle is over, the town is all in all in a terrible state. </span></div><div class="explanation">Means “although many things could probably be said, this one comes first.” Followed by an expression that indicates an extraordinary degree of something, such as 非常に／大変／すごく...だ (it is extremely/very/incredibly...). Used to emphasize this meaning. Tends to be used in spoken language. </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x58032"><span class="number">2. </span>とにかくV</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>うまくいくか<ruby><rb>分</rb><rt>わ</rt></ruby>かりませんが、とにかくやってみます。</span>／<span class="translation">I don’t know whether or not I'll succeed, but at any rate, I’ll try. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>とにかく<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>われたことだけはやっておきました。</span>／<span class="translation">Anyway, I’ve done at least what I was told to do. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>お<ruby><rb>忙</rb><rt>いそが</rt></ruby>しいとは<ruby><rb>存</rb><rt>ぞん</rt></ruby>じますがとにかくおいでくださいますようお<ruby><rb>願</rb><rt>ねが</rt></ruby>いいたします。</span>／<span class="translation">We know how very busy you are, but we would be grateful if you would please just honor us with your presence. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>まだ<ruby><rb>全員</rb><rt>ぜん いん</rt></ruby>そろっていませんが、<ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby>ですのでとにかく<ruby><rb>始</rb><rt>はじ</rt></ruby>めることにしましょう。</span>／<span class="translation">Not everyone is here yet, but since it’s time, let’s just get started. </span></div><div class="explanation">Followed by a verb expressing an intentional action and means “giving priority to this action for now, regardless of other considerations.” Used by the speaker to assert <span class="noSeparate">his/her</span> own intention, a fact, etc. or to urge the addressee to implement an action. </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x58069"><span class="number">3. </span>Nはとにかく（として）</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>かけはとにかく<ruby><rb>味</rb><rt>あじ</rt></ruby>はよい。</span>／<span class="translation">Never mind what it looks like, it tastes good. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>成績</rb><rt>せい せき</rt></ruby>はとにかくとして、<ruby><rb>明</rb><rt>あか</rt></ruby>るくて<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>いやりのあるいい<ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>です。</span>／<span class="translation">Putting aside the matter of his grades, he is a cheerful and considerate child. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>はとにかく、あなたはこの<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>満足</rb><rt>まん ぞく</rt></ruby>しているんですか。</span>／<span class="translation">Never mind me—are you satisfied with this job?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>あいさつはとにかくまずは<ruby><rb>中</rb><rt>なか</rt></ruby>にお<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>はい</rt></ruby>りください。</span>／<span class="translation">The greetings can wait until later—please come inside. </span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>先日</rb><rt>せん じつ</rt></ruby>はお<ruby><rb>世話</rb><rt>せ わ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>様</rb><rt>さま</rt></ruby>でした。</span>／<span class="translation">Thank you so much for the other day.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>いいえ。それはとにかく、お<ruby><rb>願</rb><rt>ねが</rt></ruby>いした<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>ほう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>引</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>受</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>けてくださいますか。</span>／<span class="translation">Not at all. Be that as it may, are you willing to take on the work I asked you about?</span></div><div class="explanation">Placed after a noun and used to contrast that thing with something else that is more important or should be done first. In conversation, as in (5), it can also be used at the beginning of a sentence in forms like それはとにかく（として） to refer to something the other person has said and introduce a different topic. </div></body></html>