<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>はおろか</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0882.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【はいざしらず】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0884.xhtml">【ばかり】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x81350">【はおろか】</h1><h4 class="info">［Nはおろか］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>海外旅行</rb><rt>かい がい りょ こう</rt></ruby>はおろか<ruby><rb>国内</rb><rt>こく ない</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>旅行</rb><rt>りょ こう</rt></ruby>さえ、ほとんど<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ったことがない。</span>／<span class="translation">I’ve hardly ever traveled in this country, much less abroad.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>吉井</rb><rt>よし い</rt></ruby>さんはアレルギーがひどくて、<ruby><rb>卵</rb><rt>たまご</rt></ruby>はおろかパンも<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べられないそうだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Since Yoshii-san has terrible allergies, she can’t even eat bread, let alone eggs.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>この<ruby><rb>学生</rb><rt>がく せい</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>単位</rb><rt>たん い</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>だ</rt></ruby>せません。<ruby><rb>今学期</rb><rt>こん がっ き</rt></ruby>はレポートはおろか<ruby><rb>出席</rb><rt>しゅっ せき</rt></ruby>さえしていないんです。</span>／<span class="translation">I can’t give this student credit for this course. Not only has he never turned in a paper, he’s never even been to class.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>発見</rb><rt>はっ けん</rt></ruby>されたとき、その<ruby><rb>男</rb><rt>おとこ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>住所</rb><rt>じゅう しょ</rt></ruby>はおろか<ruby><rb>名前</rb><rt>な まえ</rt></ruby>すら<ruby><rb>記憶</rb><rt>き おく</rt></ruby>していなかったという。</span>／<span class="translation">I heard that when that man was found, he couldn’t even remember his name, let alone his address.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>もし<ruby><rb>歩</rb><rt>ある</rt></ruby>いていてピストルを<ruby><rb>突</rb><rt>つ</rt></ruby>きつけられたら<ruby><rb>絶対</rb><rt>ぜっ たい</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>逆</rb><rt>さか</rt></ruby>らわないでお<ruby><rb>金</rb><rt>かね</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>渡</rb><rt>わた</rt></ruby>しなさい。さもないと<ruby><rb>金</rb><rt>かね</rt></ruby>はおろか<ruby><rb>命</rb><rt>いのち</rt></ruby>までなくすことになるよ。</span>／<span class="translation">If someone points a gun at you on the street, you must give up your money without resisting. Otherwise, you will lose not only your money but also your life. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>戦争</rb><rt>せん そう</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>末期</rb><rt>まっ き</rt></ruby>になると、<ruby><rb>青年</rb><rt>せい ねん</rt></ruby>はおろか<ruby><rb>妻子</rb><rt>さい し</rt></ruby>ある<ruby><rb>中年</rb><rt>ちゅう ねん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>男</rb><rt>おとこ</rt></ruby>まで<ruby><rb>戦場</rb><rt>せん じょう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>送</rb><rt>おく</rt></ruby>り<ruby><rb>込</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>まれた。</span>／<span class="translation">Towards the end of the war, not only young men but also middle-aged men with wives and children were sent to the front. </span></div><div class="explanation">Often used with a negative expression, in the pattern XはおろかYさえ／も／すら...ない. Means that something is a matter of course or goes without saying. Used to emphasize Y by first presenting X, which has a lower degree of something. Used in formal, old-fashioned styles. In spoken Japanese, ...どころか is used instead.</div></body></html>