<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ばいい</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0880.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【はい】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0882.xhtml">【はいざしらず】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x81118">【ばいい】</h1><h4 class="info">［N／Na　なら（ば）いい］</h4><h4 class="info">［A-ければいい］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-ばいい］</h4><div class="explanation">An idiomatic expression that consists of the <i>ba</i>-form of a conjugated predicate combined with いい. ばよい and ばよろしい are slightly more formal expressions.</div><h4 class="reference">→<a href="part0407.xhtml#idtitlex1x34167">【たらいい】</a>、<a href="part0517.xhtml#idtitlex1x48694">【といい】</a></h4><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x81148"><span class="number">1. </span>V-ばいい〈suggestion, recommendation〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>休</rb><rt>やす</rt></ruby>みたければ<ruby><rb>休</rb><rt>やす</rt></ruby>めばいい。</span>／<span class="translation">If you want to take a rest, then you should take a rest.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>お<ruby><rb>金</rb><rt>かね</rt></ruby>がないのなら、お<ruby><rb>父</rb><rt>とう</rt></ruby>さんに<ruby><rb>借</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>りればいいじゃない。</span>／<span class="translation">If you don’t have any money, why not borrow some from your father?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><span class="number">A:</span>どうすればやせられるでしょうか。</span>／<span class="translation">What can I do to lose weight?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span><ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べる<ruby><rb>量</rb><rt>りょう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>減</rb><rt>へ</rt></ruby>らして、たくさん<ruby><rb>運動</rb><rt>うん どう</rt></ruby>すればいいんじゃないですか。</span>／<span class="translation">You could reduce the amount of food you eat and do a lot of exercise, couldn’t you?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>何時</rb><rt>なん じ</rt></ruby>ごろ<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>きましょうか。</span>／<span class="translation">Around what time should I come?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>10 <ruby><rb>時</rb><rt>じ</rt></ruby>までに<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>てくれればいい。</span>／<span class="translation">It would be good if you could be here by ten.</span></div><div class="explanation">An expression used to recommend or suggest that the addressee take a certain action. Used to give or seek advice regarding what kind of measures or means should be taken in order to achieve a particular desired result. Synonymous with たらいい and can usually be rephrased as such. However, ばいい conveys a strong sense that “doing this alone is necessary and sufficient.” Depending on the context, ばいい may sometimes express a lack of interest on the part of the speaker or show that <span class="noSeparate">s/he</span> is pointedly wondering why the addressee does not understand even such a simple matter. When ばいい is used to seek advice, it may be used in the form of a question that specifies a purpose, as shown in (3A) どうすればやせられるか (what can I do to lose weight?), or it may just be used in the interrogative form どうすればいいか (what can I do?).</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x81212"><span class="number">2. </span>...ばいい〈wish, desire〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>この<ruby><rb>子</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>男</rb><rt>おとこ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>子</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>ならいいのに。</span>／<span class="translation">If only she were a boy.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>もうすこし<ruby><rb>暇</rb><rt>ひま</rt></ruby>ならいいのに。</span>／<span class="translation">I wish I had a little more free time.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>もう<ruby><rb>少</rb><rt>すこ</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>給料</rb><rt>きゅう りょう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>高</rb><rt>たか</rt></ruby>ければいいのだが。</span>／<span class="translation">I wish my salary were a bit higher. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>もっと<ruby><rb>家</rb><rt>いえ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>広</rb><rt>ひろ</rt></ruby>ければいいのになあ。</span>／<span class="translation">How I wish my house were more spacious!</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>明日</rb><rt>あす</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>雨</rb><rt>あめ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>晴</rb><rt>は</rt></ruby>れればいいなあ。</span>／<span class="translation">I really hope it’ll clear up tomorrow. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>父</rb><rt>ちち</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>生</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>きていればなあ。</span>／<span class="translation">If only my father were still alive. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（7）</span><ruby><rb>順子</rb><rt>じゅん こ</rt></ruby>さんもパーティに<ruby><rb>出席</rb><rt>しゅっ せき</rt></ruby>してくれればいいなあ。</span>／<span class="translation">I hope Junko-san will come to the party too.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses the speaker’s hope or desire that something will happen. Often followed by an expression like のだが, のに, or (のに)なあ at the end of the sentence. When the current situation differs from the one that is desired, or when the desired situation is impossible, ばいい expresses a feeling of regret, like “I’m sorry that it isn’t so.” As shown in (6), the form ...ばなあ, which leaves out いい, is also used often. In almost all cases, ばいい can be replaced by たらいい.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x81267"><span class="number">3. </span>...ばよかった</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>親</rb><rt>おや</rt></ruby>がもっと<ruby><rb>金持</rb><rt>かね も</rt></ruby>ちならばよかったのに。</span>／<span class="translation">I wish my parents had been richer. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>体</rb><rt>からだ</rt></ruby>がもっと<ruby><rb>丈夫</rb><rt>じょう ぶ</rt></ruby>ならばよかったのに。</span>／<span class="translation">If only I were healthier and stronger. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>もう 10 センチ<ruby><rb>背</rb><rt>せ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>高</rb><rt>たか</rt></ruby>ければよかったのに。</span>／<span class="translation">I wish I could have been ten centimeters taller.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>あんな<ruby><rb>映画</rb><rt>えい が</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>かなければよかった。</span>／<span class="translation">I shouldn’t have gone to see a movie like that. </span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><span class="number">A:</span>スキー<ruby><rb>旅行</rb><rt>りょ こう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>楽</rb><rt>たの</rt></ruby>しかったよ。<ruby><rb>君</rb><rt>きみ</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>ればよかった。</span>／<span class="translation">The ski trip was fun. You should have come too.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span><ruby><rb>僕</rb><rt>ぼく</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ければよかったと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>うよ。<ruby><rb>残念</rb><rt>ざん ねん</rt></ruby>だった。</span>／<span class="translation">I wish I could have gone along too. It was too bad. </span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses criticism of the addressee or a sense of regret when something did not actually happen or the current situation is contrary to what the speaker had hoped for. When the negative form なければよかった is used, as in (4), it means that the speaker regrets something that <span class="noSeparate">s/he</span> actually did. ばよかった may be followed at the end of the sentence by のに, のだが, or のだけれど. たらよかった is a synonymous expression. With this usage, it is not impossible to say とよかった. However, たらよかった and ばよかった are more common. のに is not usually used when the speaker is talking about <span class="noSeparate">his/her</span> own actions.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>僕も行ければよかったのに。／I wish I could have gone too.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>僕も行ければよかったんだが。／I wish I could have gone too.</div></body></html>