<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ともかぎらない</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0627.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ともいうべき】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0629.xhtml">【ともかく】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x59104">【ともかぎらない】</h1><h4 class="info">［N／Na　ともかぎらない］</h4><h4 class="info">［Aともかぎらない］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-ないともかぎらない］</h4><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>司会者</rb><rt>し かい しゃ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>探</rb><rt>さが</rt></ruby>してるんだけど、<ruby><rb>山下</rb><rt>やま した</rt></ruby>さん<ruby><rb>結婚式</rb><rt>けっ こん しき</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>司会</rb><rt>し かい</rt></ruby>なんか、<ruby><rb>引</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>受</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>けてくれないよね？</span>／<span class="translation">I’m looking for an emcee, but Yamashita-san probably isn’t up for emceeing a wedding reception, is she?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span><ruby><rb>一度</rb><rt>いち ど</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>聞</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>いてみたら？　<ruby><rb>引</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>受</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>けてくれないとも<ruby><rb>限</rb><rt>かぎ</rt></ruby>らないよ。</span>／<span class="translation">Why don’t you ask her? She might agree to do it.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>山田</rb><rt>やま だ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>ないと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>っていたが、<ruby><rb>気</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>まぐれな<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>のことだから、ふらりと<ruby><rb>現</rb><rt>あらわ</rt></ruby>れないともかぎらない。</span>／<span class="translation">Yamada said he wouldn’t come, but he’s such an impulsive person, there’s always a chance that he might just show up.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>病院</rb><rt>びょう いん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>慎重</rb><rt>しん ちょう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>選</rb><rt>えら</rt></ruby>んだ<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>ほう</rt></ruby>がいい。へたな<ruby><rb>医者</rb><rt>い しゃ</rt></ruby>にかかっては、<ruby><rb>命</rb><rt>いのち</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>落</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>とさないともかぎらない。</span>／<span class="translation">You should choose a hospital carefully. There’s no guarantee that you won’t lose your life if you get treated by a bad doctor.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>教師</rb><rt>きょう し</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>うことが<ruby><rb>正</rb><rt>ただ</rt></ruby>しいとは<ruby><rb>限</rb><rt>かぎ</rt></ruby>らないし、<ruby><rb>本</rb><rt>ほん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>書</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>いてあることが、<ruby><rb>正</rb><rt>ただ</rt></ruby>しいとも<ruby><rb>限</rb><rt>かぎ</rt></ruby>らない。</span>／<span class="translation">What a teacher says is not necessarily always correct, nor is what is written in books. </span></div><div class="explanation">Means “X is not definite, and there is a possibility of the opposite.” It is often used in the pattern V-ないともかぎらない, in which case it means there is still a slight possibility that something might happen under circumstances in which it is regarded as less than probable. A similar expression is とはかぎらない. </div></body></html>