<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>にせよ</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0794.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【にする】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0796.xhtml">【にそういない】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x72189">【にせよ】</h1><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>直接</rb><rt>ちょく せつ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>責任</rb><rt>せき にん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>部下</rb><rt>ぶ か</rt></ruby>にあるにせよ、<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>監督</rb><rt>かん とく</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>不行届</rb><rt>ふ ゆき とど</rt></ruby>きも<ruby><rb>糾弾</rb><rt>きゅう だん</rt></ruby>されるだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">Even though his subordinate was directly responsible, his lack of supervision will probably be criticized.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>るにせよ<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>ないにせよ、<ruby><rb>連絡</rb><rt>れん らく</rt></ruby>ぐらいはしてほしい。</span>／<span class="translation">Whether you come or not, I want you to at least contact me.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>いずれにせよもう<ruby><rb>一度</rb><rt>いち ど</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>検査</rb><rt>けん さ</rt></ruby>をしなければならない。</span>／<span class="translation">At any rate, we have to do another inspection.</span></div><div class="explanation">A formal, written expression of にせよ. Can be rephrased as ...にしろ.</div><h4 class="reference">→<a href="part0791.xhtml#idtitlex1x71930">【にしても】</a></h4></body></html>