<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>はず</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0889.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【はじめて】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0891.xhtml">【はずみ】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x82609">【はず】</h1><h4 class="info">［Nのはず］</h4><h4 class="info">［Na なはず］</h4><h4 class="info">［A／V　はず］</h4><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x82620"><span class="number">1. </span>...はずだ〈speaker’s judgment〉</h2><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>山田</rb><rt>やま だ</rt></ruby>さんも<ruby><rb>明日</rb><rt>あ す</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>会議</rb><rt>かい ぎ</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>出席</rb><rt>しゅっ せき</rt></ruby>するんですか。</span>／<span class="translation">Will Yamada-san attend the meeting tomorrow, too?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>いや、<ruby><rb>今週</rb><rt>こん しゅう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>東京</rb><rt>とう きょう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>くと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>っていたから、<ruby><rb>明日</rb><rt>あ す</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>会議</rb><rt>かい ぎ</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>ないはずだよ。</span>／<span class="translation">No, she said she was going to be in Tokyo this week, so she won’t be at the meeting tomorrow.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>あれから4<ruby><rb>年</rb><rt>ねん</rt></ruby>たったのだから、<ruby><rb>今年</rb><rt>ことし</rt></ruby>はあの<ruby><rb>子</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>卒業</rb><rt>そつ ぎょう</rt></ruby>のはずだ。</span>／<span class="translation">It’s been four years since then, so he must be graduating this year too. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>はにぎやかなこの<ruby><rb>辺</rb><rt>あた</rt></ruby>りも、<ruby><rb>昔</rb><rt>むかし</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>静</rb><rt>しず</rt></ruby>かだったはずだ。</span>／<span class="translation">It must have been quiet around here a long time ago, even though it’s bustling these days.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>本当</rb><rt>ほん  とう</rt></ruby>にこのボタンを<ruby><rb>押</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>せばいいのかい？　<ruby><rb>押</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>しても<ruby><rb>動</rb><rt>うご</rt></ruby>かないよ。</span>／<span class="translation">Are you sure we’re supposed to push this button? I did, but nothing happened.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span><ruby><rb>説明書</rb><rt>せつ めい しょ</rt></ruby>によるとそれでいいはずなんだけど。<ruby><rb>変</rb><rt>へん</rt></ruby>だなあ。</span>／<span class="translation">According to the instructions, that’s how it should work. How strange!</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><span class="number">A:</span>あそこにいるの、<ruby><rb>下田</rb><rt>しも だ</rt></ruby>さんじゃありませんか。</span>／<span class="translation">Isn’t that Shimoda-san over there?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>おかしいな。<ruby><rb>下田</rb><rt>しも だ</rt></ruby>さんは<ruby><rb>昨日</rb><rt>きのう</rt></ruby>ニューヨークに<ruby><rb>発</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>ったはずだよ。</span>／<span class="translation">That’s funny. Shimoda-san was supposed to have left for New York yesterday.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>会議</rb><rt>かい ぎ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>一</rb><rt>いち</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>時</rb><rt>じ</rt></ruby>からですか。</span>／<span class="translation">Does the meeting start at one o’clock?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>ええ、そのはずです。</span>／<span class="translation">Yes, it’s supposed to. </span></div><div class="explanation">Used to state something that the speaker thinks is a natural or logical judgment, based on some kind of evidence. This judgment must be based on a logical train of thought. Thus, はず cannot be used in cases such as the one below.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>めがねが見つからない。またどこかに置き忘れたはずだ。／I can’t find my glasses. I should have left them somewhere again. </div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>めがねが見つからない。またどこかに置き忘れたんだ。／I can’t find my glasses. I’ve left them somewhere again. </div><div class="explanation">As shown in (4) and (5), when reality does not conform to the speaker’s judgment, はず expresses a sense of surprise or suspicion. </div><div class="explanation">はず can be used with respect to a third party’s plans, as in 彼は来年帰国するはずです (he should be returning to his country next year). However, it cannot be used with respect to the speaker’s own actions. In that case, つもり (intend to), V-ようと思う (be going to do...), or ...予定だ (plan to...) are used instead.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>私は来年帰国するはずです。／I should be returning to my country next year.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>私は来年帰国する予定です。／I plan to return to my country next year. </div><div class="explanation">However, はず can be used with respect to the speaker’s own actions when an outcome can’t be determined according to <span class="noSeparate">his/her</span> own will or when it differs from <span class="noSeparate">his/her</span> intended actions, as shown below.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>マニュアルを何回も読んだからできるはずなんだけど、どうしてもコンピューターが起動しない。／I’ve read the manual over and over again, so I should be able to do this, but the computer won’t boot up no matter what.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>その旅行には、私も行くはずでしたが、結局行けませんでした。／I was supposed to go along on the trip, but in the end I couldn’t.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x82803"><span class="number">2. </span>...はずだ〈understanding〉</h2><h4 class="info">［Na なはずだ］</h4><h4 class="info">［A／V　はずだ］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>この<ruby><rb>部屋</rb><rt>へ や</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>寒</rb><rt>さむ</rt></ruby>いねえ。（<ruby><rb>窓</rb><rt>まど</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>開</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>いているのを<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>つけて）<ruby><rb>寒</rb><rt>さむ</rt></ruby>いはずだ。<ruby><rb>窓</rb><rt>まど</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>開</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>いているよ。</span>／<span class="translation">This room is cold, isn’t it? (realizing that the window is open) No wonder it’s cold. The window is open! </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>《<ruby><rb>作品</rb><rt>さく ひん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>ながら》<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>自慢</rb><rt>じ まん</rt></ruby>するはずだ。<ruby><rb>本当</rb><rt>ほん  とう</rt></ruby>にすばらしいできだ。</span>／<span class="translation">《looking at a work of art》No wonder he was boasting about this. It really is a magnificent piece. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>さっきから<ruby><rb>道</rb><rt>みち</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>妙</rb><rt>みょう</rt></ruby>にすいていると<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>っていたが、すいているはずだ。<ruby><rb>今日</rb><rt>きょう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>日曜日</rb><rt>にち よう び</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">I was just thinking how strange it is that the roads are so empty, but they ought to be. Today is Sunday.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses the speaker’s feeling of being convinced, after discovering a fact that adequately explains something <span class="noSeparate">s/he</span> was previously suspicious of or didn’t fully understand. </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x82838"><span class="number">3. </span>V-たはず</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>おかしなことに、<ruby><rb>閉</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>めたはずの<ruby><rb>金庫</rb><rt>きん こ</rt></ruby>のカギが<ruby><rb>開</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>いていた。</span>／<span class="translation">Strangely, the safe—which I thought I had locked—was open. </span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>書類</rb><rt>しょ るい</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>間違</rb><rt>ま ちが</rt></ruby>っていたよ。</span>／<span class="translation">There was a mistake on the document. </span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>えっ、よく<ruby><rb>確</rb><rt>たし</rt></ruby>かめたはずなんですけど。すみません。</span>／<span class="translation">Really? I thought I had checked it carefully. I’m sorry. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>ちゃんとかばんに<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>れたはずなのに、<ruby><rb>家</rb><rt>いえ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>帰</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>ってみると<ruby><rb>財布</rb><rt>さい ふ</rt></ruby>がない。</span>／<span class="translation">I thought I had put my wallet in my bag, but when I returned home I couldn’t find it. </span></div><div class="explanation">Used when there is a discrepancy between what the speaker expected to be true and the actual situation. Expresses a feeling of regret or suspicion on the part of the speaker.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x82884"><span class="number">4. </span>...はずがない〈negation of possibility〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>あの<ruby><rb>温厚</rb><rt>おん こう</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>がそんなひどいことをするはずがない。</span>／<span class="translation">A good-natured person like him can’t have done such a terrible thing. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>かぎがない？　そんなはずはない。さっき<ruby><rb>机</rb><rt>つくえ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>うえ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>置</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>いたんだから。</span>／<span class="translation">You can’t find the key? That’s impossible. I just left it on the desk a minute ago.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>これは<ruby><rb>君</rb><rt>きみ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>部屋</rb><rt>へ や</rt></ruby>にあったんだよ。<ruby><rb>君</rb><rt>きみ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>らないはずはない。</span>／<span class="translation">We found this in your room. So you can’t say you don’t know anything about it. </span></div><div class="explanation">Used in the form はずがない or はずはない. Means “inconceivable,” “impossible,” or “strange.” Expresses strong doubt on the part of the speaker.</div><div class="explanation">For instance, (3) means “It doesn’t make sense that you don’t know. Surely you must know.”</div><div class="explanation">The expression ...ないはずだ, which is an instance of Usage 1 (above), is used when the speaker thinks that something is “probably not” the case. For example, if (1) were rephrased as そんなひどいことはしないはずだ, it would mean “he isn’t likely to have done such a terrible thing,” which is a weaker assertion than the one expressed by ...はずがない. </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x82935"><span class="number">5. </span>...はずだった</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>るはずだったが、<ruby><rb>急用</rb><rt>きゅう よう</rt></ruby>ができて<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>られないそうだ。</span>／<span class="translation">He was supposed to come too, but I heard that he can’t because something urgent came up. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>理論上</rb><rt>り ろん じょう</rt></ruby>はうまくいくはずだったが、<ruby><rb>実際</rb><rt>じっ さい</rt></ruby>にやってみると、うまくいかなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">In theory it should have worked fine, but in practice it didn’t.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>初</rb><rt>はじ</rt></ruby>めの<ruby><rb>計画</rb><rt>けい かく</rt></ruby>では、<ruby><rb>道路</rb><rt>どう ろ</rt></ruby>はもっと<ruby><rb>北側</rb><rt>きた がわ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>通</rb><rt>とお</rt></ruby>るはずだったのに、いつの<ruby><rb>間</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>にか<ruby><rb>変更</rb><rt>へん こう</rt></ruby>されてしまった。</span>／<span class="translation">According to the original plan, the road was supposed to be constructed farther north, but that changed without any notice.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means that the speaker “had thought that naturally something would happen.” Used to express that the actual result is different from the one the speaker expected. Often implies the speaker’s surprise, disappointment, or regret. Also, often used in adversative constructions such as はずだったが／のに／けれど (should have...but.../although...was supposed to...).</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x82966"><span class="number">6. </span>...はずではなかった</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>こんなはずではなかった。もっとうまくいくと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>っていたのに。</span>／<span class="translation">This is not what was supposed to happen. I thought it would work out much better.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>こんなはずじゃなかったのに。</span>／<span class="translation">It really wasn’t meant to turn out like this.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>るはずではなかったのに。</span>／<span class="translation">He wasn’t supposed to come.</span></div><div class="explanation">Often used in the expression こんなはずではなかった (see above). Indicates the speaker’s disappointment or regret with respect to the actual situation, which differs from what <span class="noSeparate">s/he</span> had expected. Often used in the pattern ...はずではなかったのに.</div></body></html>