<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>といった</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0534.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【といけない】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0536.xhtml">【といったらありはしない】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x50340">【といった】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x50342"><span class="number">1. </span>N、NといったN</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>黒沢</rb><rt>くろ さわ</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>小津</rb><rt>お づ</rt></ruby>といった<ruby><rb>日本</rb><rt>に ほん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>有名</rb><rt>ゆう めい</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>映画</rb><rt>えい が</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>監督</rb><rt>かん とく</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>作品</rb><rt>さく ひん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>上映</rb><rt>じょう えい</rt></ruby>するそうだ。</span>／<span class="translation">It sounds like they’re going to show works by famous Japanese film directors like Kurosawa and Ozu.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>この<ruby><rb>学校</rb><rt>がっ こう</rt></ruby>には、タイ、インドネシア、マレーシアといった<ruby><rb>東南</rb><rt>とう なん</rt></ruby>アジアの<ruby><rb>国々</rb><rt>くに ぐに</rt></ruby>からの<ruby><rb>留学生</rb><rt>りゅう がく せい</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>多</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>い。</span>／<span class="translation">At this school, there are a lot of foreign students from Southeast Asian countries like Thailand, Indonesia, and Malaysia.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>この<ruby><rb>豪華</rb><rt>ごう か</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>催</rb><rt>もよお</rt></ruby>しの<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>おこな</rt></ruby>われているホールの<ruby><rb>駐車場</rb><rt>ちゅう しゃ じょう</rt></ruby>には、ベンツ、ロールスロイスといった<ruby><rb>超高級</rb><rt>ちょう こう きゅう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>車</rb><rt>しゃ</rt></ruby>がずらりと<ruby><rb>止</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>まっている。</span>／<span class="translation">The parking lot at the venue for this sumptuous event was filled with luxury cars such as Mercedes-Benzes and Rolls Royces.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used for listing examples. Implies that there are others as well.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x50373"><span class="number">2. </span>...といったところだ</h2><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>最近</rb><rt>さい きん</rt></ruby>よく<ruby><rb>借</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>りだされるビデオは<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>ですか。</span>／<span class="translation">Which videos are being rented out the most these days?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>ダイハード、スターウォーズといったところですね。</span>／<span class="translation">Movies like <i>Diehard</i> and <i>Star Wars</i>.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>体</rb><rt>からだ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>調子</rb><rt>ちょう し</rt></ruby>、どうですか。</span>／<span class="translation">How are you feeling?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span><ruby><rb>回復</rb><rt>かい ふく</rt></ruby>まであと<ruby><rb>一歩</rb><rt>いっ ぽ</rt></ruby>といったところです。</span>／<span class="translation">I’m quite close to full recovery.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>運転</rb><rt>うん てん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>腕</rb><rt>うで</rt></ruby>はどうですか。</span>／<span class="translation">How are his driving skills?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>まあまあといったところですね。</span>／<span class="translation">Well, you could say they’re not so bad.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to explain what the situation is at a particular stage. It is also possible to say というところだ.</div></body></html>