<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>となったら</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0605.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【となく】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0607.xhtml">【となっては】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x57464">【となったら】</h1><div class="explanation">Follows a clause or noun and expresses either the meaning “in such a case/situation” or “should such a thing become an issue.” When the situation or issue “turns out to be the case,” the overriding meaning is that the outcome is a natural result. Stated also as となると and となれば. </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x57476"><span class="number">1. </span>...となったら</h2><h4 class="info">［N／Na　（だ）となったら］</h4><h4 class="info">［A／V　となったら］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>もし、<ruby><rb>一戸建</rb><rt>いっ こ だて</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>家</rb><rt>いえ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>建</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>てるとなったら、<ruby><rb>銀行</rb><rt>ぎん こう</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>相当</rb><rt>そう とう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>借金</rb><rt>しゃっ きん</rt></ruby>をしなければならない。</span>／<span class="translation">If you’re going to build a single dwelling house, you’ll have to get a considerable loan from the bank.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>引</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>受</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>ける<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>誰</rb><rt>だれ</rt></ruby>もいないとなったら、<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>がやるしかない。</span>／<span class="translation">If there is no one else who will take on the task, then I’ll just have to do it.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>がすでに<ruby><rb>他</rb><rt>ほか</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>結婚</rb><rt>けっ こん</rt></ruby>してしまったとなったら、もう<ruby><rb>諦</rb><rt>あきら</rt></ruby>めるしかない。</span>／<span class="translation">If she has already married someone else, there’s nothing to do but give up.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>夫</rb><rt>おっと</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>海外</rb><rt>かい がい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>勤務</rb><rt>きん む</rt></ruby>になったんですよ。</span>／<span class="translation">My husband has been assigned a position overseas.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>そうですか。<ruby><rb>海外</rb><rt>かい がい</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>生活</rb><rt>せい かつ</rt></ruby>するとなったら、お<ruby><rb>子</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>さんの<ruby><rb>学校</rb><rt>がっ こう</rt></ruby>のことなど、いろいろ<ruby><rb>大変</rb><rt>たい へん</rt></ruby>ですね。</span>／<span class="translation">Is that so? If you’re living overseas, then you’ll have all sorts of challenges, like schooling for your children and so on.</span></div><div class="explanation">Follows a clause and means “in the case of that sort of thing/situation coming about.” Can be used either when making an assumption about a fact that has yet to be realized, or when an actual situation has been newly understood. The meaning will depend on the context. For example, in (2), the meaning can be either “assuming such a case” or “the fact of the matter has become clear.” Hypothetical assumptions are sometimes accompanied by かりに or もし. (4) is a case of hearing a person’s statement and can be paraphrased with そうなったら.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x57529"><span class="number">2. </span>いざとなったら</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>いざとなったら<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>責任</rb><rt>せき にん</rt></ruby>をとります。</span>／<span class="translation">If the situation arises, I’ll take responsibility.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>いざとなったら、<ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>辞</rb><rt>や</rt></ruby>めても<ruby><rb>自分</rb><rt>じ ぶん</rt></ruby>のやりたい<ruby><rb>道</rb><rt>みち</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>進</rb><rt>すす</rt></ruby>むつもりだ。</span>／<span class="translation">If push comes to shove, I intend to quit my present job and proceed on the course I want to take.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses what will happen in the case that some impediment arises in the implementation of some action. An expression of intent is often used in the latter clause. In that case, となったら can be restated as となれば but not となると.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x57554"><span class="number">3. </span>N（のこと）となったら</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>日本</rb><rt>に ほん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>料理</rb><rt>りょう り</rt></ruby>となったらここの<ruby><rb>板前</rb><rt>いた まえ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>右</rb><rt>みぎ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>る<ruby><rb>者</rb><rt>もの</rt></ruby>はいないそうだ。</span>／<span class="translation">When it comes to Japanese cuisine, there’s no one better than the chef here.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>自分</rb><rt>じ ぶん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>専門</rb><rt>せん もん</rt></ruby>のこととなったら、<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>何時間</rb><rt>なん じ かん</rt></ruby>でも<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はな</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>続</rb><rt>つづ</rt></ruby>ける。</span>／<span class="translation">When it comes to his field of expertise, he can continue talking for hours on end.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used after a noun that is taken up as the point in question. Expresses the meaning “with regard to” or “when that is the topic.” </div></body></html>