<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>もくされている</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0979.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【もかまわず】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0981.xhtml">【もさることながら】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x97007">【もくされている】</h1><h4 class="info">［Nともくされている］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>今度</rb><rt>こん ど</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>競馬</rb><rt>けい ば</rt></ruby>では、マックイーンが<ruby><rb>一番</rb><rt>いち ばん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>人気</rb><rt>にん き</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>目</rb><rt>もく</rt></ruby>されている。</span>／<span class="translation">McQueen is considered the favorite in this horse race.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>がその<ruby><rb>事件</rb><rt>じ けん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>最重要</rb><rt>さい じゅう よう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>参考人</rb><rt>さん こう にん</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>目</rb><rt>もく</rt></ruby>されている。</span>／<span class="translation">He is considered the most important witness to that incident.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>事業</rb><rt>じ ぎょう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>後継者</rb><rt>こう けい しゃ</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>目</rb><rt>もく</rt></ruby>されているのは、<ruby><rb>重役</rb><rt>じゅう やく</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>市川</rb><rt>いちかわ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>氏</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">Director Ichikawa-shi (Mr. Ichikawa) is recognized as the successor to the business.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>知事</rb><rt>ち じ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>選挙</rb><rt>せん きょ</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>最有力</rb><rt>さい ゆう りょく</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>候補</rb><rt>こう ほ</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>目</rb><rt>もく</rt></ruby>されているのは、<ruby><rb>早田</rb><rt>はや た</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>氏</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>です。</span>／<span class="translation">Hayata-shi (Mr. Hayata) is regarded as the front-runner in the gubernatorial election.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “to be regarded as...,” “to have such a reputation.” However, 目されている is used in cases where the truth or what will happen is still unknown.</div></body></html>