<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>わけがない</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part1052.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【わ...わ】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part1054.xhtml">【わけだ】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x106167">【わけがない】</h1><h4 class="info">［N　な／である　わけがない］</h4><h4 class="info">［Na なわけがない］</h4><h4 class="info">［A／V　わけがない］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>あいつが<ruby><rb>犯人</rb><rt>はん にん</rt></ruby>なわけ（が）ないじゃないか。</span>／<span class="translation">There’s no way that guy could be the perpetrator.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>最近</rb><rt>さい きん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>元気</rb><rt>げん き</rt></ruby>？</span>／<span class="translation">Have you been well lately?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span><ruby><rb>元気</rb><rt>げん き</rt></ruby>なわけ（が）ないでしょ。<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>仲直</rb><rt>なか なお</rt></ruby>りできなくて、もう<ruby><rb>悲惨</rb><rt>ひ さん</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>状態</rb><rt>じょう たい</rt></ruby>なのよ。</span>／<span class="translation">There’s no way I could be well. I can’t make up with my boyfriend; it’s a miserable state of affairs.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>北海道</rb><rt>ほっ かい どう</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>熱帯</rb><rt>ねっ たい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>植物</rb><rt>しょく ぶつ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>育</rb><rt>そだ</rt></ruby>つわけがない。</span>／<span class="translation">It’s impossible for tropical plants to grow in Hokkaido.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>こんな<ruby><rb>忙</rb><rt>いそが</rt></ruby>しい<ruby><rb>時期</rb><rt>じ き</rt></ruby>にスキーに<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>けるわけがない。</span>／<span class="translation">It’s impossible for me to go skiing at such a busy time.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>勉強</rb><rt>べん きょう</rt></ruby>もしないで<ruby><rb>遊</rb><rt>あそ</rt></ruby>んでばかりいて、<ruby><rb>試験</rb><rt>し けん</rt></ruby>にパスするわけがないじゃないか。</span>／<span class="translation">There’s no way you can pass the exam—not studying and just enjoying yourself all the time.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>考</rb><rt>かんが</rt></ruby>えてみれば、<ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>対</rb><rt>たい</rt></ruby>してそんなひどいことを<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>うわけがなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">If you think about it, there’s no way she could have said such a horrid thing to him.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to strongly insist that there is no reason for such a thing to occur/no possibility of such a thing occurring. In speech, わけない is often said, with the が being omitted. It can be rephrased as はずがない.</div></body></html>