<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>てくれる</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0457.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【てくれ】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0459.xhtml">【てこそ】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x41416">【てくれる】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x41421"><span class="number">1. </span>V-てくれる〈benefit〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>鈴木</rb><rt>すず き</rt></ruby>さんが<ruby><rb>自転車</rb><rt>じ てん しゃ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>修理</rb><rt>しゅう り</rt></ruby>してくれた。</span>／<span class="translation">Suzuki-san repaired the bicycle for me.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>誰</rb><rt>だれ</rt></ruby>もそのことを（<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>に）<ruby><rb>教</rb><rt>おし</rt></ruby>えてくれなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">No one told me about it.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>母</rb><rt>はは</rt></ruby>がイタリアを<ruby><rb>旅行</rb><rt>りょ こう</rt></ruby>したとき<ruby><rb>案内</rb><rt>あん ない</rt></ruby>してくれたガイドさんは、<ruby><rb>日本語</rb><rt>に ほん ご</rt></ruby>がとても<ruby><rb>上手</rb><rt>じょう ず</rt></ruby>だったらしい。</span>／<span class="translation">The tour conductor who guided my mother when she traveled  around Italy was apparently very fluent in Japanese.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>自転車</rb><rt>じ てん しゃ</rt></ruby>がパンクして<ruby><rb>困</rb><rt>こま</rt></ruby>っていたら、<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>らない<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>手伝</rb><rt>て つだ</rt></ruby>ってくれて、<ruby><rb>本当</rb><rt>ほん  とう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>助</rb><rt>たす</rt></ruby>かった。</span>／<span class="translation">Just when I was in trouble as my bicycle got a flat tire, a stranger generously lent me a hand. That really helped me!</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>せっかく<ruby><rb>迎</rb><rt>むか</rt></ruby>えに<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>てくれたのに、すれ<ruby><rb>違</rb><rt>ちが</rt></ruby>いになってしまってごめんなさい。</span>／<span class="translation">You took the trouble to come meet me and then we just missed each other—I’m sorry!</span></div><div class="explanation">This is an expression which makes the person doing an action the subject, and it is used for expressing that the person does something for the benefit of the speaker or someone associated with the speaker. Used when the person conducts the action voluntarily. V-てもらうis often used if the action is conducted at the request of the speaker. </div><div class="explanation">If only the verb is used instead of V-てくれる, the sentence will mean that the action was done for someone other than the speaker or someone associated with the speaker, so care is needed. For example, 鈴木さんが自転車を修理した means that Suzuki-san fixed a bicycle, and 鈴木さんが自転車を修理してくれた means “Suzuki-san fixed a bicycle for me.” If the speaker does not use the V-てくれる form, despite the fact that the action was done for <span class="noSeparate">his/her</span> benefit, the sentence will sound odd.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>誰もそのことを私に教えなかった。／No one told me about it.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>誰もそのことを私に教えてくれなかった。／No one told me about it.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>おいしいリンゴを送って、ありがとう。／Sent delicious apples, thank you. </div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>おいしいリンゴを送ってくれて、ありがとう。／Thank you very much for sending me delicious apples.</div><div class="explanation">This expression may also be used sarcastically, when a certain action causes the speaker an inconvenience or problem, as seen in the following example. </div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>大事な書類をどこかに置き忘れるなんて、まったく困ったことをしてくれたな。／You’ve certainly given me a lot of trouble by misplacing an important document somewhere!</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x41532"><span class="number">2. </span>V-てくれる〈request〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>この<ruby><rb>本</rb><rt>ほん</rt></ruby>、そこの<ruby><rb>棚</rb><rt>たな</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>れてくれる？</span>／<span class="translation">Can you put these books on the shelf there?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>ちょっとこの<ruby><rb>荷物</rb><rt>に もつ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>運</rb><rt>はこ</rt></ruby>んでくれないか？</span>／<span class="translation">(a man speaking) Hey, can you carry this luggage for me?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>すみませんけど、ちょっと<ruby><rb>静</rb><rt>しず</rt></ruby>かにしてくれませんか。<ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>大事</rb><rt>だい じ</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>用事</rb><rt>よう じ</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>電話</rb><rt>でん わ</rt></ruby>してるんです。</span>／<span class="translation">Sorry, could you be quiet? I’m in the middle of an important phone call.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>もしよかったら、うちの<ruby><rb>子</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>英語</rb><rt>えい ご</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>教</rb><rt>おし</rt></ruby>えてくれないか？</span>／<span class="translation">Is there a chance you could teach my child English? </span></div><div class="explanation">This is an expression to request an action for the speaker or someone associated with the speaker. The plain form is used towards a subordinate or someone equal and close. ...てくれないか  is used by men. ...てくれませんか creates a politer impression than ...てくれますか. Used when cautioning someone, as in example (3). </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x41569"><span class="number">3. </span>V-てやってくれないか</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>息子</rb><rt>むすこ</rt></ruby>にもう<ruby><rb>少</rb><rt>すこ</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>勉強</rb><rt>べん きょう</rt></ruby>するように<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ってやってくれ。</span>／<span class="translation">Can you tell my son to study a bit more?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>山田</rb><rt>やま だ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>君</rb><rt>くん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なに</rt></ruby>か<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べるものを<ruby><rb>作</rb><rt>つく</rt></ruby>ってやってくれないか。</span>／<span class="translation">Can you maybe make something for Yamada-kun to eat?</span></div><div class="explanation">Used when requesting the listener to conduct an action for a third person (someone other than the speaker and the listener). Used when the speaker, the listener, and the third person in question are close to one another and all are somehow associated with the speaker.</div></body></html>