<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>にそういない</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0795.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【にせよ】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0797.xhtml">【にそくして】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x72225">【にそういない】</h1><h4 class="info">［N／V　にそういない］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>犯人</rb><rt>はん にん</rt></ruby>はあの<ruby><rb>男</rb><rt>おとこ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>相違</rb><rt>そう い</rt></ruby>ない。</span>／<span class="translation">The criminal must be that man.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>は3<ruby><rb>日前</rb><rt>か まえ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>家</rb><rt>いえ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>たまま<ruby><rb>帰</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>ってこない。きっとなにか<ruby><rb>事件</rb><rt>じ けん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>巻</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>込</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>まれたに<ruby><rb>相違</rb><rt>そう い</rt></ruby>ない。</span>／<span class="translation">She left home three days ago and hasn’t come back yet. She must have been involved in some incident. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>これを<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>ったら、<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>はきっと<ruby><rb>烈火</rb><rt>れっ か</rt></ruby>のごとく<ruby><rb>怒</rb><rt>おこ</rt></ruby>り<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>だ</rt></ruby>すに<ruby><rb>相違</rb><rt>そう い</rt></ruby>ない。</span>／<span class="translation">If he gets to know this, I’m sure he will fly into a rage.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses the speaker’s firm conviction and means “it must be so” or “I’m sure ....” Used in formal, written Japanese, and can be rephrased as ...にちがいない.</div></body></html>