<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>てくださる</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0454.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【てください】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0456.xhtml">【てくる】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x40830">【てくださる】</h1><div class="explanation">くださる is attached to a verb <i>te</i>-form. There are other expressions that are even more polite, such as おR-くださる and ごNくださる.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x40848"><span class="number">1. </span>V-てくださる〈benefit〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>先生</rb><rt>せん せい</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>論文</rb><rt>ろん ぶん</rt></ruby>をコピーしてくださった。</span>／<span class="translation">My teacher kindly photocopied the thesis for me.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>明日</rb><rt>あした</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>山田</rb><rt>やま だ</rt></ruby>さんがわざわざうちまで<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>てくださることになった。</span>／<span class="translation">It was decided that Yamada-san would kindly come to my house tomorrow.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>どうも<ruby><rb>今日</rb><rt>きょう</rt></ruby>はわざわざおいで<ruby><rb>下</rb><rt>くだ</rt></ruby>さってありがとうございました。</span>／<span class="translation">Thank you for coming all the way to see me today.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>せっかくいろいろ<ruby><rb>計画</rb><rt>けい かく</rt></ruby>して<ruby><rb>下</rb><rt>くだ</rt></ruby>さったのに、だめになってしまって<ruby><rb>申</rb><rt>もう</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>訳</rb><rt>わけ</rt></ruby>ありません。</span>／<span class="translation">With all the trouble you took to make all sorts of plans, I am so sorry that they didn’t work out.</span></div><div class="explanation">This is an expression which makes the person doing an action the subject, and it is used for expressing that the person does something for the benefit of the speaker or someone associated with the speaker. Used when the person doing the action is senior or not close to the speaker. The honorific form of V-てくれる.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x40888"><span class="number">2. </span>V-てくださる〈request〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>ちょっとここで<ruby><rb>待</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>っていてくださる？</span>／<span class="translation">(a woman speaking) Would you wait for me here for a moment?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>いっしょに<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ってくださらない？</span>／<span class="translation">(a woman speaking) Would you come with me?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>ついでにこの<ruby><rb>手紙</rb><rt>て がみ</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>だ</rt></ruby>しておいて<ruby><rb>下</rb><rt>くだ</rt></ruby>さいますか。</span>／<span class="translation">Could you also mail this letter for me?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>ちょっとこの<ruby><rb>書類</rb><rt>しょ るい</rt></ruby>、ミスがないかどうかチェックして<ruby><rb>下</rb><rt>くだ</rt></ruby>さいませんか。</span>／<span class="translation">Could I ask you to check that there is no mistake in this document?</span></div><div class="explanation">This is an expression used to request someone to do something for the speaker or someone associated with the speaker. ...てくださいますか and ...てくださいませんか are even more polite than ...てください.  ...てくださる and ...てくださらない in (1) and (2) are used by women to make a request of someone subordinate or equal in a friendly and refined way. </div></body></html>