<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>なんでも</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0728.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【なんて<sub class="variation">2</sub>】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0730.xhtml">【なんと】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x68362">【なんでも】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x68364"><span class="number">1. </span>なんでも</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>ほしいものは<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>でも<ruby><rb>手</rb><rt>て</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>はい</rt></ruby>る。</span>／<span class="translation">I can get anything I want.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>でも<ruby><rb>好</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>きなものを<ruby><rb>注文</rb><rt>ちゅう もん</rt></ruby>して<ruby><rb>下</rb><rt>くだ</rt></ruby>さい。</span>／<span class="translation">Please order anything you like.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>あの<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>植物</rb><rt>しょく ぶつ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>事</rb><rt>こと</rt></ruby>なら<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>でも<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>っている。</span>／<span class="translation">That person knows everything about plants. </span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses the meaning of “whatever,” “all kinds of things,” or “everything.” </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x68395"><span class="number">2. </span>なんでも...らしい／...そうだ</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>でも<ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>はもうすぐ<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>をやめるそうですよ。</span>／<span class="translation">I hear she’s quitting her job soon.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>うわさによると、<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>でも<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>らは<ruby><rb>浜松</rb><rt>はま まつ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>引</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby>っ<ruby><rb>越</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>したという<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はなし</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">There is a rumor that they’ve moved to Hamamatsu.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>でもこの<ruby><rb>窪地</rb><rt>くぼ ち</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>隕石</rb><rt>いん せき</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>落下</rb><rt>らっ か</rt></ruby>したあとだということです。</span>／<span class="translation">I hear this hollow was created by a meteor.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>でもこのあたりには<ruby><rb>幽霊</rb><rt>ゆう れい</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>るっていう<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はなし</rt></ruby>ですよ。</span>／<span class="translation">There’s talk that ghosts appear around here.</span></div><div class="explanation">Followed by a hearsay expression such as らしい／そうだ／という話だ／ということだ, なんでも is used to convey something the speaker has heard but is unsure about.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x68432"><span class="number">3. </span>なんでもない</h2><h3 class="subsubtitle" id="idsubsubtitlex1x68435"><span class="number">a. </span>なんでもない</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>あの<ruby><rb>頃</rb><rt>ころ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>苦労</rb><rt>く ろう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>比</rb><rt>くら</rt></ruby>べればこんな<ruby><rb>苦労</rb><rt>く ろう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>でもない。</span>／<span class="translation">This trouble is nothing compared with what I had at that time.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>でもないことにそんなに<ruby><rb>大騒</rb><rt>おお さわ</rt></ruby>ぎするな。</span>／<span class="translation">Don’t make such a fuss about nothing. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>この<ruby><rb>程度</rb><rt>てい ど</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>にとっては<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>でもないことです。</span>／<span class="translation">It is no trouble for her to do such work like this. </span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>顔色</rb><rt>かお いろ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>悪</rb><rt>わる</rt></ruby>いけど<ruby><rb>気分</rb><rt>き ぶん</rt></ruby>でも<ruby><rb>悪</rb><rt>わる</rt></ruby>いんじゃないですか。</span>／<span class="translation">You look pale—do you feel sick? </span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>いいえ、<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>でもありません。<ruby><rb>大丈夫</rb><rt>だい じょう ぶ</rt></ruby>です。</span>／<span class="translation">No, it’s nothing.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses the meaning “this is nothing that we should concern ourselves about” or “this is nothing serious.”</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x68484"><span class="number">b. </span>Nでもなんでもない</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>病気</rb><rt>びょう き</rt></ruby>でも<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>でもない。ただ<ruby><rb>怠</rb><rt>なま</rt></ruby>けたくて<ruby><rb>休</rb><rt>やす</rt></ruby>んでいただけだ。</span>／<span class="translation">I’m not sick or anything like that. I just feel lazy and like taking a rest.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>こんなものは<ruby><rb>芸術</rb><rt>げい じゅつ</rt></ruby>でも<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>でもありません。だれだって<ruby><rb>少</rb><rt>すこ</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>練習</rb><rt>れん しゅう</rt></ruby>すれば<ruby><rb>作</rb><rt>つく</rt></ruby>れます。</span>／<span class="translation">This is not art at all. Anyone can create it with a little bit of practice. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>お<ruby><rb>前</rb><rt>まえ</rt></ruby>とはもう<ruby><rb>友達</rb><rt>とも だち</rt></ruby>でもなんでもない。<ruby><rb>二度</rb><rt>に ど</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>僕</rb><rt>ぼく</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>前</rb><rt>まえ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>顔</rb><rt>かお</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>だ</rt></ruby>さないでくれ。</span>／<span class="translation">I’m not a friend of yours any more. Never show yourself to me again.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>政治家</rb><rt>せい じ か</rt></ruby>でもなんでもない。ただのペテン<ruby><rb>師</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">He’s not a politician or anything like that. He’s just a fraud.</span></div><div class="explanation">With a noun, emphasizes the meaning “that’s not what it is.” In many instances, there is positive value for the correct choice in the sentence, and by refuting that, でもなんでもない states the speaker’s negative evaluation more strongly. </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x68521"><span class="number">4. </span>なにがなんでも<span class="reference">→<a href="part0697.xhtml#idtitlex1x64088">【なにがなんでも】</a></span></h2></body></html>