<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>にしたら</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0784.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【にしたって】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0786.xhtml">【にして】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x71629">【にしたら】</h1><h4 class="info">［Nにしたら］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>せっかくの<ruby><rb>申</rb><rt>もう</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>断</rb><rt>ことわ</rt></ruby>ってしまったのだから、<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>にしたら、<ruby><rb>自分</rb><rt>じ ぶん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>親切</rb><rt>しん せつ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>踏</rb><rt>ふ</rt></ruby>みにじられたと<ruby><rb>感</rb><rt>かん</rt></ruby>じていることだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">Since we declined his generous offer, I think he feels that we have trampled on his kindness.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>母親</rb><rt>はは おや</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>のためを<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>って<ruby><rb>厳</rb><rt>きび</rt></ruby>しくしつけようとしたのでしょうが、<ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>にしたら<ruby><rb>自分</rb><rt>じ ぶん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>嫌</rb><rt>きら</rt></ruby>われていると<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>いこんでしまったのです。</span>／<span class="translation">I think the mother tried to strictly discipline her child for his sake, but from the child’s point of view, he assumed that his mother disliked him.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>学生</rb><rt>がく せい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>語学力</rb><rt>ご がく りょく</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>高</rb><rt>たか</rt></ruby>めるには<ruby><rb>必要</rb><rt>ひつ よう</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>訓練</rb><rt>くん れん</rt></ruby>なのだが、<ruby><rb>学生</rb><rt>がく せい</rt></ruby>にしたら<ruby><rb>退屈</rb><rt>たい くつ</rt></ruby>きわまりない<ruby><rb>授業</rb><rt>じゅ ぎょう</rt></ruby>だと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>うにちがいない。</span>／<span class="translation">This is necessary training to develop the students’ language ability, but for the students themselves, I’m sure they think this is an extremely boring lecture.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>にしたら<ruby><rb>親切</rb><rt>しん せつ</rt></ruby>のつもりだったのですが、<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>かた</rt></ruby>がきつかったのか<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>はすっかり<ruby><rb>怒</rb><rt>おこ</rt></ruby>ってしまいました。</span>／<span class="translation">From my side it was meant to be kind, but I phrased it harshly and he went into a rage. </span></div><div class="explanation">With a noun expressing a person, expresses the meaning of “from the viewpoint of this person.” Used to mean that the speaker speculates on someone’s thought from <span class="noSeparate">his/her</span> point of view. Cannot be used to refer to the speaker’s viewpoint.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>私にしたらたいへん嬉しく思います。／From my point of view, I’m very pleased. </div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>私としてはたいへん嬉しく思います。／As for me, I am very pleased.</div></body></html>