<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ば</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0876.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【のみならず】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0878.xhtml">【は...で】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x78464">【ば】</h1><h4 class="info">［N／Na　なら（ば）］</h4><h4 class="info">［A-ければ］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-ば］</h4><div class="explanation">ば is a conjugation form for predicates and indicates a condition. It is the most typical marker for conditional clauses in Japanese, and its usage overlaps partially with that of たら, と, and なら.</div><div class="explanation">When this conditional follows a noun or a <i>na</i>-adjective, ば is often dropped and the form N/Naなら is used. N/Naであれば is a formal, written expression for N/Naなら. The negative form N/Naでなければ is used in both written and spoken Japanese. The<i> i</i>-adjective いい always takes the form よければ, not いければ.</div><div class="explanation">ば is usually used the same way as たら. However, ば tends to be used more in written Japanese, while たら is used more in spoken Japanese. In casual spoken language, sometimes the combination of “consonant + <i>eba</i>” at the end of a word changes to “consonant + <i>ya</i>” (e.g. あれば→ありゃ, 行けば→行きゃ, 飲めば→飲みゃ, なければ→なけりゃ), and the combination A-ければ may change to A-きゃ (e.g. なければ→なきゃ).</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x78517"><span class="number">1. </span>...ば〈generic condition〉</h2><h4 class="info">［...ば　N／Na　だ］</h4><h4 class="info">［...ば A-い］</h4><h4 class="info">［...ば V-る］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>春</rb><rt>はる</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>れば<ruby><rb>花</rb><rt>はな</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>咲</rb><rt>さ</rt></ruby>く。</span>／<span class="translation">When spring comes, flowers bloom. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>10 を2で<ruby><rb>割</rb><rt>わ</rt></ruby>れば5になる。</span>／<span class="translation">When you divide ten by two, you get five.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>台風</rb><rt>たい ふう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>近</rb><rt>ちか</rt></ruby>づけば<ruby><rb>気圧</rb><rt>き あつ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>下</rb><rt>さ</rt></ruby>がる。</span>／<span class="translation">When a typhoon approaches, the atmospheric pressure drops. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>年</rb><rt>とし</rt></ruby>をとれば<ruby><rb>身体</rb><rt>からだ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>弱</rb><rt>よわ</rt></ruby>くなる。</span>／<span class="translation">People get weaker with age.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>経済</rb><rt>けい ざい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>状態</rb><rt>じょう たい</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>悪化</rb><rt>あっ か</rt></ruby>すれば<ruby><rb>犯罪</rb><rt>はん ざい</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>増加</rb><rt>ぞう か</rt></ruby>する。</span>／<span class="translation">When the economy deteriorates, the crime rate increases. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>人間</rb><rt>にん げん</rt></ruby>というものは、<ruby><rb>余分</rb><rt>よ ぶん</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>金</rb><rt>かね</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>持</rb><rt>も</rt></ruby>ち<ruby><rb>歩</rb><rt>ある</rt></ruby>けばつい<ruby><rb>使</rb><rt>つか</rt></ruby>いたくなるものだ。</span>／<span class="translation">If people carry around extra money, they will want to spend it. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（7）</span><ruby><rb>信</rb><rt>しん</rt></ruby>じていれば<ruby><rb>夢</rb><rt>ゆめ</rt></ruby>はかなうものだ。</span>／<span class="translation">If you believe in your dream, it will come true.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（8）</span>だれでもほめられればうれしい。</span>／<span class="translation">Everyone is happy when praised. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（9）</span><ruby><rb>風</rb><rt>かぜ</rt></ruby>がふけば<ruby><rb>桶屋</rb><rt>おけ や</rt></ruby>がもうかる。</span>／<span class="translation">Bliss often falls into the hands of an unexpected person. (lit. “If the wind blows, the bucket-maker profits.”)</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（10）</span><ruby><rb>犬</rb><rt>いぬ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>西</rb><rt>にし</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>向</rb><rt>む</rt></ruby>きゃ<ruby><rb>尾</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>東</rb><rt>ひがし</rt></ruby>。</span>／<span class="translation">If a dog faces west, its tail will point east. (used to emphasize that something is obvious or a matter of course)</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（11）</span><ruby><rb>終</rb><rt>おわ</rt></ruby>りよければすべてよし。</span>／<span class="translation">All’s well that ends well.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to state a conditional relation regarding a general state of affairs, not a specific person or thing. Means “when X happens, Y also happens, without exception.” Expresses logical or rule-based relations or cause-and-effect relations that are not situated at a particular point in time but always hold true. The dictionary form is always used at the end of the sentence. Not used to talk about a personal experience or one particular event. Used to say that “when X is realized, Y is the natural consequence,” “such-and-such generally happens,” or “something is intrinsically such-and-such.”</div><div class="explanation">When this expression is used, the subject is often omitted. When the subject appears, it is one that refers to some kind of group as a whole, such as 人はだれでも (everyone/all people) or Nというものは (N in general). This use of the <i>ba-</i>form is often followed at the end of the sentence by ものだ, which indicates that the thing in question intrinsically has a certain nature, as exemplified in (6) and (7). Often used in proverbs and maxims as well, as in (9)-(11). </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x78618"><span class="number">2. </span>...ば〈repetition, habit〉</h2><div class="explanation">Used with respect to a particular person or thing and expresses a habit or an action that is repeated. Means “every time X happens, Y happens too,” “whenever X is done, Y is invariably done as well.” The difference between this usage and the generic conditional described in 1 is that the generic conditional, which describes a situation that has an indefinite subject and transcends time, is always used with the dictionary form of a predicate at the end of the sentence, whereas the repetitive/habitual conditional can be used with not only the dictionary form but also the <i>ta</i>-form. This conditional is used to describe a habit or a repeated action of a definite subject. </div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x78634"><span class="number">a. </span>...ば... V-る</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>祖母</rb><rt>そ ぼ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>天気</rb><rt>てん き</rt></ruby>がよければ<ruby><rb>毎朝</rb><rt>まいあさ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>近所</rb><rt>きん じょ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>散歩</rb><rt>さん ぽ</rt></ruby>します。</span>／<span class="translation">My grandmother takes a walk in the neighborhood every morning, if the weather is nice. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>暇</rb><rt>ひま</rt></ruby>さえあればいつもテレビを<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>ている。</span>／<span class="translation">Whenever he has time, he always watches television. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>父</rb><rt>ちち</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>顔</rb><rt>かお</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>れば「<ruby><rb>勉強</rb><rt>べん きょう</rt></ruby>しろ」と<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>う。</span>／<span class="translation">Whenever my father sees me, he says “Go study!” </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>愛犬</rb><rt>あい けん</rt></ruby>のポチは<ruby><rb>主人</rb><rt>しゅ じん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>姿</rb><rt>すがた</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>ればとんでくる。</span>／<span class="translation">My pet dog, Pochi, always runs to me (= his master) when he sees me. </span></div><div class="explanation">This usage of the <i>ba</i>-form has the dictionary form of an action verb at the end of the sentence. Expresses a current habit or a repeated action of a definite subject. </div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x78674"><span class="number">b. </span>...ば... V-た</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>のころは、<ruby><rb>天気</rb><rt>てん き</rt></ruby>がよければ、よく<ruby><rb>母</rb><rt>はは</rt></ruby>とこの<ruby><rb>河原</rb><rt>か わら</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>散歩</rb><rt>さん ぽ</rt></ruby>したものだ。</span>／<span class="translation">When I was a child, I often used to take walks with my mother along this riverbed, if the weather was nice. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>学生</rb><rt>がく せい</rt></ruby>のころは<ruby><rb>暇</rb><rt>ひま</rt></ruby>さえあればお<ruby><rb>酒</rb><rt>さけ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>飲</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>んで<ruby><rb>友達</rb><rt>とも だち</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>語</rb><rt>かた</rt></ruby>り<ruby><rb>明</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>かしたものだ。</span>／<span class="translation">When I was a college student, whenever I had time I used to drink and talk with my friends all night long. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>父</rb><rt>ちち</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>東京</rb><rt>とう きょう</rt></ruby>へ<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>けば<ruby><rb>必</rb><rt>かなら</rt></ruby>ずお<ruby><rb>土産</rb><rt>みやげ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>ってきてくれた。</span>／<span class="translation">My father used to buy me a souvenir every time he went to Tokyo.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>20 <ruby><rb>年</rb><rt>ねん</rt></ruby>ほど<ruby><rb>前</rb><rt>まえ</rt></ruby>には、<ruby><rb>街</rb><rt>まち</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>少</rb><rt>すこ</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>離</rb><rt>はな</rt></ruby>れれば、いくらでも<ruby><rb>自然</rb><rt>し ぜん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>残</rb><rt>のこ</rt></ruby>っていた。</span>／<span class="translation">Twenty years ago, if you went just a little way out of the city, there were still plenty of places where the natural environment remained untouched.</span></div><div class="explanation">This usage of the <i>ba-</i>form expresses a past habit of a definite subject, or a state/event that always took place under some particular circumstances in the past. Means “someone used to do/always did...in the past,” “if someone did A, then B was always the case.” Sometimes used with V-たものだ, which indicates recollection, as shown in (1) and (2). </div><div class="explanation">In the pattern ...ば...V-た, the <i>ba</i>-form can also indicate a state or event contrary to the actual situation, as in (4). The difference between counter-factual ば and repetitive/habitual ば is that the latter states a fact that has actually been realized. </div><div class="explanation">Like ば, たら can also be used to state a past fact. However, while ば expresses an action that was repeated in the past or a situation that was always realized under certain conditions, たら usually expresses a past event that took place one time only. </div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例1）</span>ビールを2本飲めば酔っぱらいました。／Whenever I drank two bottles of beer, I got drunk. </div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例2）</span>ビールを2本飲んだら酔っぱらいました。／When I drank two bottles of beer, I got drunk.</div><div class="explanation">(1) above means “when I drank two bottles, I always/without exception got drunk.” This expresses an event that was repeated in the past. In contrast, (2) means “when I happened to drink two bottles, I got drunk” and expresses a past event that occurred once.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x78767"><span class="number">3. </span>...ば〈not-yet-realized condition〉</h2><div class="explanation">Expresses the relation “if X happens, Y will happen,” with respect to a particular thing or person. X can be something that either has or has not been realized, but Y is always something that has not yet been realized.</div><div class="explanation">The generic conditional ば described in Usage 1 is used to talk about things or events in general and is always accompanied by the dictionary form of a predicate at the end of the sentence. On the other hand, the hypothetical conditional ば is used to apply a general condition to a particular situation and state a prediction. It can be combined with expressions such as だろう and かもしれない at the end of the sentence. </div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>〈一般条件〉食事を減らせば誰でもやせる。 ／〈generic condition〉If you reduce your food intake at meals, anyone can lose weight. </div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>〈仮定条件〉食事を減らせばあなたもやせるだろう。 ／〈not-yet-realized condition〉If you reduce your food intake at meals, you too will lose weight. </div><div class="explanation">The slot for Y in this pattern may be filled by a statement describing an unrealized situation, an expression of intention or command, or some other expression that reveals the speaker’s thoughts/feelings or <span class="noSeparate">his/her</span> desire to exert an influence on someone.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x78818"><span class="number">a. </span>...ば+<ruby><rb>未</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>実</rb><rt>じつ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>現</rb><rt>げん</rt></ruby>のことがら</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>もし<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>立場</rb><rt>たち ば</rt></ruby>なら、やっぱり<ruby><rb>同</rb><rt>おな</rt></ruby>じように<ruby><rb>考</rb><rt>かんが</rt></ruby>えるだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">If I were in his shoes, I would think the same. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>もし<ruby><rb>天気</rb><rt>てん き</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>悪</rb><rt>わる</rt></ruby>ければ、<ruby><rb>試合</rb><rt>し あい</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>中止</rb><rt>ちゅう し</rt></ruby>になるかもしれない。</span>／<span class="translation">If the weather is bad, the match may be canceled. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>手術</rb><rt>しゅ じゅつ</rt></ruby>をすれば<ruby><rb>助</rb><rt>たす</rt></ruby>かるでしょう。</span>／<span class="translation">If you have surgery, you will probably recover. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>こんなに<ruby><rb>安</rb><rt>やす</rt></ruby>ければ、きっとたくさん<ruby><rb>売</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>れると<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>う。</span>／<span class="translation">If it is this inexpensive, I’m sure it will sell well. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>それだけ<ruby><rb>成績</rb><rt>せい せき</rt></ruby>がよければ、どの<ruby><rb>大学</rb><rt>だい がく</rt></ruby>にでも<ruby><rb>入学</rb><rt>にゅう がく</rt></ruby>できるはずです。</span>／<span class="translation">If your grades are that good, you should be able to get into any university. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span>ふだん<ruby><rb>物静</rb><rt>もの しず</rt></ruby>かな<ruby><rb>夫</rb><rt>おっと</rt></ruby>がめずらしく、<ruby><rb>一時間</rb><rt>いち じ かん</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>説教</rb><rt>せっ きょう</rt></ruby>していた。あれだけ<ruby><rb>叱</rb><rt>しか</rt></ruby>られれば、<ruby><rb>息子</rb><rt>むすこ</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>少</rb><rt>すこ</rt></ruby>しは<ruby><rb>反省</rb><rt>はん せい</rt></ruby>するにちがいない。</span>／<span class="translation">Surprisingly, my usually quiet husband lectured our son for a whole hour.  Having been given such a talking-to, surely our son will reflect on his conduct at least a little.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used with respect to a specific person or thing and means “if X happens, of course Y will also happen.” Y refers to an unrealized situation or event and is often combined with an expression of supposition or prediction at the end of the sentence, such as だろう, にちがいない, はずだ, かもしれない, or 思う.</div><div class="explanation">In (1)-(3), the speaker assumes X, which has not (yet) been realized, and makes supposition Y, which is something that should happen under condition X. (4)-(6) are cases in which X has already been realized. Here the <i>ba</i>-form expresses the notion that “if a situation like this has actually occurred, then Y should naturally occur as well.” </div><div class="explanation">When the speaker is quite certain that Y will be realized, the non-past declarative form of a predicate can be used at the end of the sentence, as shown below.</div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（7）</span><ruby><rb>応募</rb><rt>おう ぼ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>人数</rb><rt>にん ずう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>多</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>ければ<ruby><rb>抽選</rb><rt>ちゅう せん</rt></ruby>になります。</span>／<span class="translation">If there is a large number of applicants, the selection will be made by lottery. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（8）</span>うっかりミスさえしなければ<ruby><rb>必</rb><rt>かなら</rt></ruby>ず<ruby><rb>合格</rb><rt>ごう かく</rt></ruby>できますよ。</span>／<span class="translation">If you just don’t make any careless mistakes, you will definitely pass. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（9）</span><ruby><rb>食事</rb><rt>しょく じ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>量</rb><rt>りょう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>減</rb><rt>へ</rt></ruby>らして<ruby><rb>運動</rb><rt>うん どう</rt></ruby>をすれば、2、3キロぐらいはすぐ<ruby><rb>減</rb><rt>へ</rt></ruby>りますよ。</span>／<span class="translation">If you reduce your food intake and get some exercise, you will soon lose two or three kilograms. </span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（10）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>気</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>分</rb><rt>ぶん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>悪</rb><rt>わる</rt></ruby>くなってきたよ。</span>／<span class="translation">I’m starting to feel sick.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>それだけ<ruby><rb>飲</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>めば、<ruby><rb>気分</rb><rt>き ぶん</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>悪</rb><rt>わる</rt></ruby>くなるよ。</span>／<span class="translation">If you’ve drunk that much, you will feel bad.</span></div><div class="explanation">ば is often used to say that X is a necessary and sufficient condition for the realization of Y. In (8), it takes the pattern Xさえ...ばY and expresses the meaning “in order to realize Y, it is sufficient to realize X.” In (9), it is used to state what must be done in order to obtain a desired result, and in (10) it means “when you’ve drunk so much, it’s no surprise that you feel bad.”</div><div class="explanation">All of these are ultimately examples of the generic condition “if X, then definitely Y” being applied to specific cases. For instance, in (10), the generic condition “anyone who drinks too much will start to feel bad” is applied to a particular addressee’s case, in order to convey the message “if you too drink so much, it’s only natural that you feel sick.”</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x78945"><span class="number">b. </span>...ば+<ruby><rb>意</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>志</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>・<ruby><rb>希</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>望</rb><rt>ぼう</rt></ruby></h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>安</rb><rt>やす</rt></ruby>ければ<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>うつもりです。</span>／<span class="translation">If it is inexpensive, I intend to buy it. </span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><span class="number">A:</span>こんどの<ruby><rb>日曜日</rb><rt>にち よう び</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>天気</rb><rt>てん き</rt></ruby>がよければハイキングに<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>こうよ。</span>／<span class="translation">If the weather is nice, let’s go hiking next Sunday.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>いいね。すこしぐらい<ruby><rb>天気</rb><rt>てん き</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>悪</rb><rt>わる</rt></ruby>くても<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>こうよ。</span>／<span class="translation">Sounds good. Even if the weather isn’t quite perfect, let’s go. </span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><span class="number">A:</span>なにか<ruby><rb>飲</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>む？</span>／<span class="translation">Do you want something to drink?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>そうだな、ビールがあれば<ruby><rb>飲</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>みたいな。</span>／<span class="translation">Well, if you have beer, I’d like some. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>レポートを<ruby><rb>提出</rb><rt>てい しゅつ</rt></ruby>しなければ、<ruby><rb>合格点</rb><rt>ごう かく てん</rt></ruby>はあげません。</span>／<span class="translation">If you don’t submit a paper, I won’t give you a passing grade. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>田中</rb><rt>た なか</rt></ruby>さんが<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>かなければ、<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>かない。</span>／<span class="translation">If Tanaka-san isn’t going, I won’t go either. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>田中</rb><rt>た なか</rt></ruby>さんが<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>けば、<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>く。</span>／<span class="translation">If Tanaka-san is going, I’ll go too. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（7）</span><ruby><rb>掃除</rb><rt>そう じ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>手伝</rb><rt>て つだ</rt></ruby>ってくれればおこづかいをあげる。</span>／<span class="translation">If you help me with the cleaning, I’ll give you some spending money. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（8）</span>お<ruby><rb>電話</rb><rt>でん わ</rt></ruby>くださればお<ruby><rb>迎</rb><rt>むか</rt></ruby>えに<ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>がります。</span>／<span class="translation">If you telephone me, I will come to meet you.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（9）</span>もし、<ruby><rb>今学期</rb><rt>こん がっ き</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>中</rb><rt>ちゅう</rt></ruby>にこの<ruby><rb>本</rb><rt>ほん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>読</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>み<ruby><rb>終</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>われば、<ruby><rb>次</rb><rt>つぎ</rt></ruby>にこの<ruby><rb>本</rb><rt>ほん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>読</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>みます。</span>／<span class="translation">If I can finish reading this book this term, I’ll read that book next. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（10）</span>もし<ruby><rb>雨</rb><rt>あめ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>降</rb><rt>ふ</rt></ruby>れば<ruby><rb>中止</rb><rt>ちゅう し</rt></ruby>しよう。</span>／<span class="translation">If it rains, let’s cancel it.</span></div><div class="explanation">ば is used in the pattern Xば...しよう／したい, where Y expresses the speaker’s intention or desire, and the range of predicates that can appear in X is restricted. The general tendency is that there is no difficulty if the predicate in X is stative, but use of a verb that expresses an action or change of state often sounds unnatural.</div><div class="explanation">(1)-(5) contain stative predicates, including <i>i</i>-adjectives, ある, and V-ない, so ば can be used with no problem. In (6)-(10), X expresses an action or change of state, but it is still possible to use ば. This has to do with the fact that (6) expresses the same action on the part of both the listener and the speaker, and (7) and (8), which mean “if you do X, I will do Y in return,” are cases of the speaker making a promise to the listener in exchange for something. The ば clause in (9) means “I don’t know whether I can finish reading it or not, but.../I may not be able to finish reading it, but if I can...,” and the one in (10) means “supposing it were to rain.” These expressions are used when the speaker has doubts about whether or not X will definitely occur, or when <span class="noSeparate">s/he</span> takes into account the possibility that X will not occur.</div><div class="explanation">So, in cases like (6)-(10), ば can be used even though X expresses an action or change of state. However, when X expresses a future plan which involves a sequence of actions that progress over time, ば cannot be used. For example, if (9) is intended to mean “after I finish reading this book, then I’ll read the next,” たら must be used instead of ば.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>この本を読めば次にこの本を読みます。／If I read this book, I’ll read that book next. </div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>この本を読んだら次にこの本を読みます。／After I read this book, I’ll read that book next. </div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x79081"><span class="number">c. </span>...ば+<ruby><rb>働</rb><rt>はたら</rt></ruby>きかけ</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>そう<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>いたければ<ruby><rb>勝手</rb><rt>かっ て</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>え。</span>／<span class="translation">If that’s what you want to think, go right ahead! </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>やりたくなければやるな。</span>／<span class="translation">Don’t do it if you don’t want to. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>宿題</rb><rt>しゅく だい</rt></ruby>をすませなければ<ruby><rb>遊</rb><rt>あそ</rt></ruby>びに<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ってはいけない。</span>／<span class="translation">Unless you finish your homework, you can’t go out to play. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>飲</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>みたくなければ<ruby><rb>飲</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>まなくてもいい。</span>／<span class="translation">If you don’t want to drink, you don’t have to. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>お<ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby>があれば、もう<ruby><rb>少</rb><rt>すこ</rt></ruby>しゆっくりしていってくださいよ。</span>／<span class="translation">If you have time, please stay for a little while longer. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>明日</rb><rt>あ す</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>天気</rb><rt>てん き</rt></ruby>がよければ<ruby><rb>海</rb><rt>うみ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>きませんか。</span>／<span class="translation">If the weather is nice tomorrow, shall we go to the beach?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（7）</span>7<ruby><rb>時</rb><rt>じ</rt></ruby>までに<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>終</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>われば、<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>てください。</span>／<span class="translation">If you’re finished work by seven, please come. </span></div><div class="explanation">ば is followed by an expression that requires the listener to perform an action, such as a command, prohibition, permission, invitation, or request. In general, when an “exertion-of-influence” expression like one of these appears at the end of the sentence, it is unlikely that an action or change-of-state verb can be used in X, and the range of verbs that can be used is even more restricted than when Y is an expression of intention or desire. </div><div class="explanation">ば can be used when it is followed by a stative predicate such as V-たい, Vない, or ある, as is the case in examples (1)-(6). In (7), the change-of-state verb 終わる is used with ば and followed by an expression of request. This sentence conveys the meaning “you might not finish, but supposing you are able to...” and indicates that the speaker has doubts or a negative feeling about the possibility that the listener will finish. In cases like this, ば may sometimes be used. </div><div class="explanation">However, in general, when X expresses an action or change, and the speaker instructs the listener to perform a second action (after the first action/change has taken place) or prohibits that action, ば cannot be used. たら should be used instead.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>駅に着けば迎えに来てください。／If you arrive at the station, please come to pick me up.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>駅に着いたら迎えに来てください。／When you arrive at the station, please come to pick me up.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>お酒を飲めば運転するな。／If you drink, don’t drive.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>お酒を飲んだら運転するな。／When you drink, don’t drive. </div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x79192"><span class="number">d. </span>...ば+<ruby><rb>問</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>いかけ</h3><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>学生</rb><rt>がく せい</rt></ruby>ならば、<ruby><rb>料金</rb><rt>りょう きん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>安</rb><rt>やす</rt></ruby>くなりますか。</span>／<span class="translation">If you’re a student, is the charge lower?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span><ruby><rb>大人</rb><rt>おとな</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>料金</rb><rt>りょう きん</rt></ruby>の2<ruby><rb>割引</rb><rt>わり びき</rt></ruby>になります。</span>／<span class="translation">It will be twenty percent off the adult price.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>この<ruby><rb>病気</rb><rt>びょう き</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>手術</rb><rt>しゅ じゅつ</rt></ruby>をすれば<ruby><rb>治</rb><rt>なお</rt></ruby>りますか。</span>／<span class="translation">Will this illness be cured if I have an operation?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>あやまれば<ruby><rb>許</rb><rt>ゆる</rt></ruby>してくれるでしょうか。</span>／<span class="translation">If I apologize, will she forgive me?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><span class="number">A:</span>どうすれば<ruby><rb>機嫌</rb><rt>き げん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>直</rb><rt>なお</rt></ruby>してくれるかしら。</span>／<span class="translation">What can I do to restore his good humor?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span><ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なに</rt></ruby>か<ruby><rb>贈</rb><rt>おく</rt></ruby>り<ruby><rb>物</rb><rt>もの</rt></ruby>をして<ruby><rb>丁寧</rb><rt>てい ねい</rt></ruby>にあやまるのが<ruby><rb>一番</rb><rt>いち ばん</rt></ruby>ね。</span>／<span class="translation">The best thing you can do is give him some kind of gift and apologize politely.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><span class="number">A:</span>どのぐらい<ruby><rb>入院</rb><rt>にゅう いん</rt></ruby>すればよくなるでしょうか。</span>／<span class="translation">How long will I have to stay in the hospital to recover?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>2<ruby><rb>週間</rb><rt>しゅう かん</rt></ruby>ぐらいですね。</span>／<span class="translation">About two weeks. </span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><span class="number">A:</span>どこに<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>けばその<ruby><rb>本</rb><rt>ほん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>つけることができるでしょうか。</span>／<span class="translation">I wonder where I can go to find that book.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span><ruby><rb>神田</rb><rt>かん だ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>古本屋</rb><rt>ふる ほん や</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>探</rb><rt>さが</rt></ruby>せば、<ruby><rb>一冊</rb><rt>いっ さつ</rt></ruby>ぐらいはあるかもしれませんね。</span>／<span class="translation">If you go to the used bookstores in Kanda, you may be able to find a copy.</span></div><div class="explanation">The pattern XばYか expresses a question seeking an answer from the listener. (1)-(3) are yes-no interrogative sentences, and (4)-(6) are interrogative sentences with question words such as どう (how) and どこ (where). In the latter case, ば is often used in the form どうすればYか, to ask about the means or method X that can be used in order to achieve the good result Y. On the other hand, when the speaker is asking what to do when X has occurred, it is more natural to use たら, and using ば often results in an unnatural or anomalous expression.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>雨が降ればどうしますか。／What will you do if it rains?</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>雨が降ったらどうしますか。／What will you do if it rains?</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x79307"><span class="number">e. </span><ruby><rb>疑</rb><rt>ぎ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>問</rb><rt>もん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>詞</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>+V-ば...のか</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>いったいどういうふうに<ruby><rb>説明</rb><rt>せつ めい</rt></ruby>すれば<ruby><rb>分</rb><rt>わ</rt></ruby>かってもらえるのか。</span>／<span class="translation">How in the world should I explain it, to make him understand?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>何年</rb><rt>なん ねん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>勉強</rb><rt>べん きょう</rt></ruby>すればあんなに<ruby><rb>上手</rb><rt>じょう ず</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>英語</rb><rt>えい ご</rt></ruby>がしゃべれるようになるのだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">I wonder how many years I should study English in order to be able to speak as fluently as that.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>どれだけ<ruby><rb>待</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>てば、<ruby><rb>手紙</rb><rt>て がみ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>るのか。</span>／<span class="translation">How long should I wait for the letter to come?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>人間</rb><rt>にん げん</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>一体</rb><rt>いっ たい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>何度</rb><rt>なん ど</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>同</rb><rt>おな</rt></ruby>じ<ruby><rb>過</rb><rt>あやま</rt></ruby>ちを<ruby><rb>繰</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>り<ruby><rb>返</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>せば、<ruby><rb>気</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>がすむのであろうか。</span>／<span class="translation">How many times do human beings have to repeat the same mistake until they are satisfied?</span></div><div class="explanation">This is a rhetorical expression that consists of a question word such as 何 (what), どれだけ (how much), or どんなに (how/however) followed by the <i>ba</i>-form of a verb. It means “no matter how much I do..., things don’t go the way I want them to,” and it expresses the speaker’s sense of exasperation or desperation regarding a certain situation. Expressions like のか, のだ, and のだろう(か) are used at the end of the sentence. V-ば can be replaced by V-たら.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x79350"><span class="number">4. </span>...ば〈counter-factual〉</h2><div class="explanation">A statement of something contrary to fact comes before ば, and after ば comes a description of something that should (have) happen(ed) if the situation were the opposite. Used to talk about an undesirable situation that has already been realized, or about a situation that is obviously impossible to realize. </div><div class="explanation">When this pattern is used to say that a desired situation has not been realized, it conveys a feeling of regret or disappointment. On the other hand, when it is used to say that an undesirable situation has been avoided, it implies the speaker’s feeling of relief, as in “it’s a good thing such-and-such didn’t happen.”</div><div class="explanation">In many cases, it is impossible to distinguish a counter-factual use from a factual one on the basis of form alone. However, the patterns below are often used in counter-factual conditional sentences. Also, this usage of ば can always be substituted with たら.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x79383"><span class="number">a. </span>...ば　...のに／...のだが</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>宿題</rb><rt>しゅく だい</rt></ruby>がなければ<ruby><rb>夏休</rb><rt>なつ やす</rt></ruby>みはもっと<ruby><rb>楽</rb><rt>たの</rt></ruby>しいのに。（<ruby><rb>残念</rb><rt>ざん ねん</rt></ruby>なことに<ruby><rb>宿題</rb><rt>しゅく だい</rt></ruby>がある。）</span>／<span class="translation">If there were no assignments, my summer holiday would be more enjoyable. (Unfortunately, I do have assignments.)</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>お<ruby><rb>金</rb><rt>かね</rt></ruby>があれば<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>うんだけどなあ。（お<ruby><rb>金</rb><rt>かね</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>無</rb><rt>な</rt></ruby>いから<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>えない。）</span>／<span class="translation">If I had the money, I would buy it. (Because I don’t have the money, I can’t buy it.)</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>お<ruby><rb>金</rb><rt>かね</rt></ruby>があれば<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>えたんだが。（お<ruby><rb>金</rb><rt>かね</rt></ruby>がなかったので<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>えなかった。）</span>／<span class="translation">If I had had the money, I could have bought it. (Because I didn’t have the money, I couldn’t buy it.)</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>試験</rb><rt>し けん</rt></ruby>うまくいった？</span>／<span class="translation">Did your exam go well?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>うまくいっていれば、こんな<ruby><rb>不機嫌</rb><rt>ふ き げん</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>顔</rb><rt>かお</rt></ruby>はしていないさ。（<ruby><rb>試験</rb><rt>し けん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>失敗</rb><rt>しっ ぱい</rt></ruby>したから、こんな<ruby><rb>不機嫌</rb><rt>ふ き げん</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>顔</rb><rt>かお</rt></ruby>をしている。）</span>／<span class="translation">If it had gone well, I wouldn’t look this crabby. (Because I failed the exam, I look this crabby.)</span></div><div class="explanation">The pattern XばYのに／のだが／のだけれど is a counter-factual conditional sentence. The predicate in Y takes either the dictionary form or the <i>ta</i>-form. (1) and (2) are examples of the former. These express that the speaker desires something that is different from the present situation, regrets this situation, etc. In (3) the speaker uses the <i>ta</i>-form to hypothesize a past situation that is different from what actually happened and to state that, if the hypothetical situation had been realized, the result would have been different. (4) illustrates the pattern V-ていればV-ている, which is used to state a hypothesis, with regard to a situation that has already been realized, that if things had been different the present situation would not have arisen. </div><div class="explanation">As shown in (1)-(3), when an expression like のに, のだが, or のだけれど appears at the end of the sentence, it is clear that the sentence is a counter-factual conditional. However, such expressions are not always used, as seen in (4).</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x79447"><span class="number">b. </span>...ば　...だろう／...はずだ</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>地震</rb><rt>じ しん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>起</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>こるのがあと1<ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>遅</rb><rt>おそ</rt></ruby>ければ<ruby><rb>被害</rb><rt>ひ がい</rt></ruby>はずっと<ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>きかっただろう。</span>／<span class="translation">If the earthquake had happened one hour later, the damage would have been far more extensive. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>気</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>をつけていれば、あんな<ruby><rb>事故</rb><rt>じ こ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>起</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>きなかったはずだ。</span>／<span class="translation">If she’d been more careful, an accident like that wouldn’t have happened. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>発見</rb><rt>はっ けん</rt></ruby>がもう<ruby><rb>少</rb><rt>すこ</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>遅</rb><rt>おそ</rt></ruby>ければ<ruby><rb>助</rb><rt>たす</rt></ruby>からなかったかもしれない。</span>／<span class="translation">If he had been found a little later, he might not have been saved.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>あの<ruby><rb>時</rb><rt>とき</rt></ruby>すぐに<ruby><rb>手術</rb><rt>しゅ じゅつ</rt></ruby>をしていれば、<ruby><rb>助</rb><rt>たす</rt></ruby>かったにちがいない。</span>／<span class="translation">If she had had an operation right away at that time, she would certainly have recovered. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>止</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>めに<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>はい</rt></ruby>らなければ、ひどい<ruby><rb>喧嘩</rb><rt>けん か</rt></ruby>になっていたと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>う。</span>／<span class="translation">I think it would have turned into a terrible fight, if he had not stepped in to stop it.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span>あの<ruby><rb>時</rb><rt>とき</rt></ruby>、あの<ruby><rb>飛行機</rb><rt>ひ こう き</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>乗</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>っていれば、<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>ここにいないはずだ。</span>／<span class="translation">If I had taken that flight then, I would not be here now. </span></div><div class="explanation">Used to speculate about a situation or event that could have happened, if things had been different. An expression of prediction or conjecture, such as だろう, はずだ, かもしれない, にちがいない, or と思う, is used at the end of the sentence. </div><div class="explanation">When the expression of prediction or conjecture is preceded by the <i>ta</i>-form of a predicate, as in (1)-(5), it means that the actual past situation differs from the one expressed by the predicate. When the dictionary form is used, as in (6), it means that the present situation differs from the one expressed by the predicate. </div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x79508"><span class="number">c. </span>...ば...ところだ（った）</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>もう<ruby><rb>少</rb><rt>すこ</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>若</rb><rt>わか</rt></ruby>ければ、<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>自分</rb><rt>じ ぶん</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>くところだ。</span>／<span class="translation">If I were a little younger, I would be ready to go myself. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>あのとき、あの<ruby><rb>飛行機</rb><rt>ひ こう き</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>乗</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>っていれば<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>事故</rb><rt>じ こ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>巻</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>込</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>まれていたところだ。</span>／<span class="translation">If I had taken that flight then, I would have been caught up in the accident too. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>今日</rb><rt>きょう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>授業</rb><rt>じゅ ぎょう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>突然</rb><rt>とつ ぜん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>休講</rb><rt>きゅう こう</rt></ruby>になったらしい。<ruby><rb>田中</rb><rt>た なか</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>電話</rb><rt>でん わ</rt></ruby>をしてくれなければ、もう<ruby><rb>少</rb><rt>すこ</rt></ruby>しで<ruby><rb>学校</rb><rt>がっ こう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>くところだった。</span>／<span class="translation">Apparently today’s class was canceled without notice. If Tanaka hadn’t called me, I would have been on my way to school in a little while. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>電車</rb><rt>でん しゃ</rt></ruby>がもう<ruby><rb>少</rb><rt>すこ</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>早</rb><rt>はや</rt></ruby>く<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>ていれば<ruby><rb>大惨事</rb><rt>だい さん じ</rt></ruby>になるところだった。</span>／<span class="translation">If the train had arrived a little earlier, it would have been a terrible disaster. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>注意</rb><rt>ちゅう い</rt></ruby>していただかなければ<ruby><rb>忘</rb><rt>わす</rt></ruby>れていたところでした。</span>／<span class="translation">If you hadn’t reminded me, I would have forgotten. </span></div><div class="explanation">In this pattern, ば is followed at the end of the sentence by an expression like V-るところだった, V-ていたところだ, or V-ていたところだった. </div><div class="explanation">...ばV-るところだ is used to hypothesize an unrealized situation or event Y, which would likely be realized if the situation were different from X. (1) is such an example; it means “I’m not actually young so I can’t go, but I am almost inclined to do so.”</div><div class="explanation">...ばV-ていたところだ means “if the situation had been different, I would have done such-and-such/such-and-such would have happened.” Expresses a potential situation in the past, as exemplified in (2). </div><div class="explanation">...ばV-るところだった, shown in (3) and (4), is used when an event that would have happened under different circumstances was avoided just before it takes place. Used when the speaker feels relieved that it was possible to avoid an unfavorable outcome. </div><div class="explanation">忘れていたところだった in (5) can be rephrased as 忘れているところだった. However, the former expresses a past situation, with the sense of “I managed not to forget,” while the latter expresses a present situation, with the sense of “I’ve managed to remember.”</div><h4 class="reference">→<a href="part0580.xhtml#idsubtitlex1x54930">【ところだ】2</a></h4><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x79594"><span class="number">d. </span>...ば　V-た／V-ていた</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>安</rb><rt>やす</rt></ruby>ければ<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>った。</span>／<span class="translation">If it had been inexpensive, I would have bought it.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>もっと<ruby><rb>早</rb><rt>はや</rt></ruby>く<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>れば<ruby><rb>間</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>合</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>った。</span>／<span class="translation">If I had come earlier, I would have been in time.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>手当</rb><rt>て あ</rt></ruby>てが<ruby><rb>早</rb><rt>はや</rt></ruby>ければ、<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>助</rb><rt>たす</rt></ruby>かっていた。</span>／<span class="translation">If he had been treated sooner, he would have been saved. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>きちんとした<ruby><rb>説明</rb><rt>せつ めい</rt></ruby>があれば、<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>反対</rb><rt>はん たい</rt></ruby>しなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">If a proper explanation had been given, I wouldn’t have objected either. </span></div><div class="explanation">In this pattern, ば takes the <i>ta</i>-form of a verb at the end of the sentence and expresses a counter-factual situation or event. Used with respect to a past situation, to hypothesize an action that was not actually performed or a state that differs from reality, and to express a situation or event that would have occurred under the hypothetical circumstances. (2), for instance, means “if I had come earlier, I would have been in time; however, since I actually came late, I was not in time.”</div><div class="explanation">In general, counter-factual conditional sentences often end with expressions like のに／のだが／のだけれど, or だろう／かもしれない／はずだ／にちがいない／と思う, or ところだ(った), as shown in patterns (a)-(c) above. However, there are cases in which no such expression is used, as shown in this pattern (d). Note that when the <i>ta</i>-form is used in sentence-final position, in particular, conditional sentences with ば and たら may express different meanings.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例1）</span>ボタンを押したら爆発した。／When I pressed the button, it exploded. </div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例2）</span>ボタンを押せば爆発した。／If I had pressed the button, it would have exploded.</div><div class="explanation">Example 1, which means “I pressed the button. Then it exploded,” expresses an event that actually took place. On the other hand, example 2 is a counter-factual conditional sentence that means “If I had pressed the button, it would have exploded, but I didn’t actually press the button, so it didn’t explode.”</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x79677"><span class="number">5. </span>...ば〈already-realized condition〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>変</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>わり<ruby><rb>者</rb><rt>もの</rt></ruby>だという<ruby><rb>評判</rb><rt>ひょう ばん</rt></ruby>だったが、<ruby><rb>会</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>ってみれば、うわさほどのことはなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">He had the reputation of being quite a strange character, but when I met him, he was not half as strange as was rumored.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>われてみればそれももっともな<ruby><rb>気</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>がする。</span>／<span class="translation">Now that you say so, I think that’s a good point too. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>始</rb><rt>はじ</rt></ruby>める<ruby><rb>前</rb><rt>まえ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>心配</rb><rt>しん ぱい</rt></ruby>だったが、すべてが<ruby><rb>終</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>わってみれば、それほど<ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>たい</rt></ruby>したことではなかったと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>う。</span>／<span class="translation">I was worried before I started, but now that it’s all over, I don’t think it was such a big deal. </span></div><div class="explanation">The pattern XばY is used to express that the speaker realized Y at the time X occurred. For this usage, たら and と are more usual, and the use of ば is restricted to somewhat old-fashioned literary expressions such as those found in poetry and novels. When this pattern is used in spoken Japanese, it usually takes the form V-てみれば and expresses the speaker’s understanding or acceptance after learning the truth about something, with the sense of “that is quite right” or “of course, it stands to reason.”</div><div class="explanation">In (1)-(3), ば can be replaced by たら, but when たら is used, it means “as a result of taking such-and-such an action, I realized something.” For example, when ば in (1) is replaced by たら to say 会ってみたら、うわさほどのことはなかったよ, the たら sentence means “as a result of meeting him, I found out that he was not as (strange) as was rumored.” Thus, when a speaker is describing a new realization just the way it happened, <span class="noSeparate">s/he</span> usually uses たら or と; if ば is used, it often sounds unnatural. </div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>昨日、台所で変な音がするので泥棒かと思って行ってみれば、弟がラーメンを作っていた。／Yesterday I heard a strange noise in the kitchen so I thought it might be a thief, but if I went to see, my brother was making <i>ra</i><i>a</i><i>men</i> noodle soup. </div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>昨日、台所で変な音がするので泥棒かと思って｛行ってみたら／行ってみると｝、弟がラーメンを作っていた。／Yesterday I heard a strange noise in the kitchen so I thought it might be a thief, but when I went to see, my brother was making <i>ra</i><i>a</i><i>men</i> noodle soup. </div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>朝起きれば、雨が降っていた。／If I got up in the morning, it was raining. </div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>朝｛起きたら／起きると｝、雨が降っていた。／When I got up in the morning, it was raining. </div><div class="explanation">When talking about one person who performs two actions in succession, one time only, と should be used, not ば or たら. See the example below. </div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>次郎は家に｛帰れば／帰ったら｝、テレビを見た。／If Jiro came home, he watched TV. </div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>次郎は家に帰ると、テレビを見た。／When Jiro came home, he watched TV. </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x79795"><span class="number">6. </span>...ば...で</h2><h4 class="info">［A-ければ A-いで］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-ば V-たで］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>自動車</rb><rt>じ どう しゃ</rt></ruby>がないとさぞ<ruby><rb>不便</rb><rt>ふ べん</rt></ruby>だろうと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>っていたが、なければないでやっていけるものだ。</span>／<span class="translation">I thought it would be very inconvenient to live without a car, but I can actually manage without one.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>父</rb><rt>ちち</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>暑</rb><rt>あつ</rt></ruby>さに<ruby><rb>弱</rb><rt>よわ</rt></ruby>い。それでは<ruby><rb>冬</rb><rt>ふゆ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>好</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>きかというとそうではない。<ruby><rb>寒</rb><rt>さむ</rt></ruby>ければ<ruby><rb>寒</rb><rt>さむ</rt></ruby>いで<ruby><rb>文句</rb><rt>もん く</rt></ruby>ばかり<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>っている。</span>／<span class="translation">My father can’t take the heat. But that doesn’t mean he likes winter. Once it gets cold, he does nothing but complain about it. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>金</rb><rt>かね</rt></ruby>などというものは、<ruby><rb>無</rb><rt>な</rt></ruby>ければ<ruby><rb>困</rb><rt>こま</rt></ruby>るが、あればあったでやっかいなものだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Money is something that is trouble if you don’t have any, but a nuisance if you do have some. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>小</rb><rt>ちい</rt></ruby>さい<ruby><rb>間</rb><rt>あいだ</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>病気</rb><rt>びょう き</rt></ruby>をしないだろうかちゃんと<ruby><rb>育</rb><rt>そだ</rt></ruby>つだろうかと<ruby><rb>心配</rb><rt>しん ぱい</rt></ruby>ばかりしていたが、<ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>きくなれば<ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>きくなったで、<ruby><rb>受験</rb><rt>じゅ けん</rt></ruby>やら<ruby><rb>就職</rb><rt>しゅう しょく</rt></ruby>やら<ruby><rb>心配</rb><rt>しん ぱい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>種</rb><rt>たね</rt></ruby>はなくならない。</span>／<span class="translation">When my children were little, I fretted over whether they would get sick or grow up the right way. Now that they’re getting older, there is no end to worries about entrance exams and job-hunting and so forth.</span></div><div class="explanation">The same verb or adjective is repeated in this pattern, which is used to say that situations that should contrast with each other are essentially the same. For instance, (1) means “if I had a car, it would be convenient, but even without a car, I don’t have as much trouble as I’d expected,” (2) means “My father complains, regardless of whether it is hot or cold,” (3) means “Money is always troublesome, whether you have it or not,” and (4) means “Children make us worry while they’re small and also after they’ve grown up.” In (4), it is possible to omit the second use of 大きく and say 大きくなればなったで instead. ...たら...で is a synonymous expression.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x79839"><span class="number">7. </span>...ば〈introductory utterance〉</h2><div class="explanation">This pattern is used to indicate in advance the conditions under which the following statement will be made, or to give advance warning or explanation of something. It includes idiomatic expressions that are rather fixed. In most cases, ば can be replaced by たら.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x79855"><span class="number">a. </span>...ば+request, recommendation</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>もし、お<ruby><rb>差</rb><rt>さ</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>支</rb><rt>つか</rt></ruby>えなければ、ご<ruby><rb>住所</rb><rt>じゅう しょ</rt></ruby>とお<ruby><rb>名前</rb><rt>な まえ</rt></ruby>をお<ruby><rb>聞</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>かせください。</span>／<span class="translation">If you wouldn’t mind, please tell me your name and address.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>今日</rb><rt>きょう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>説明会</rb><rt>せつ めい かい</rt></ruby>はもう<ruby><rb>終</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>わったんでしょうか。</span>／<span class="translation">Has today’s briefing already finished?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>はい、3<ruby><rb>時</rb><rt>じ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>終了</rb><rt>しゅう りょう</rt></ruby>いたしました。よろしければ、<ruby><rb>来週</rb><rt>らい しゅう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>火曜</rb><rt>か よう</rt></ruby>にも<ruby><rb>説明会</rb><rt>せつ めい かい</rt></ruby>がございますが。</span>／<span class="translation">Yes, it was over at three. If it’s convenient for you, there will be another briefing next Tuesday.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>よろしければ、もう<ruby><rb>一杯</rb><rt>いっ ぱい</rt></ruby>いかがですか。</span>／<span class="translation">If it suits you, would you care for another glass?</span></div><div class="explanation">The expressions above in <i>ba</i>-form are idiomatic expressions used to make requests, recommendations, or suggestions. They show the speaker’s consideration for the listener’s situation or feelings. They mean “as long as it is not contrary to your convenience or intentions.” These are polite expressions that convey the speaker’s reservation—that is, the attitude that it is not necessary for the listener to act on the request, suggestion, etc., if it is inconvenient for <span class="noSeparate">him/her</span> or if <span class="noSeparate">s/he</span> does not want to do it. </div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x79904"><span class="number">b. </span>...ば〈viewpoint〉</h3><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>本当</rb><rt>ほん  とう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>くのかい。</span>／<span class="translation">Are you really going?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>うん。でも<ruby><rb>正直</rb><rt>しょう じき</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>えば、<ruby><rb>本当</rb><rt>ほん  とう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>きたくないんだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Yeah. But to be honest, I really don’t want to.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>50 <ruby><rb>年</rb><rt>ねん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>前</rb><rt>まえ</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>比</rb><rt>くら</rt></ruby>べれば、<ruby><rb>日本人</rb><rt>に ほん じん</rt></ruby>もずいぶん<ruby><rb>背</rb><rt>せ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>高</rb><rt>たか</rt></ruby>くなったと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>える。</span>／<span class="translation">Compared with fifty years ago, we can say that Japanese people too have gotten quite a bit taller.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>円高</rb><rt>えん だか</rt></ruby>なので、<ruby><rb>国内</rb><rt>こく ない</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>旅行</rb><rt>りょ こう</rt></ruby>よりも<ruby><rb>海外旅行</rb><rt>かい がい りょ こう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>ほう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>安</rb><rt>やす</rt></ruby>くつくらしい。<ruby><rb>考</rb><rt>かんが</rt></ruby>えてみればおかしな<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はなし</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">I’ve heard that because the yen is strong now, traveling abroad is less expensive than traveling in Japan. If you think about it, that’s really strange.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>えば、<ruby><rb>事業</rb><rt>じ ぎょう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>成功</rb><rt>せい こう</rt></ruby>するまでのこの 10 <ruby><rb>年</rb><rt>ねん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>長</rb><rt>なが</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>年月</rb><rt>ねん げつ</rt></ruby>だった。</span>／<span class="translation">Looking back, these past ten years—until the project succeeded—were really long ones.</span></div><div class="explanation">Verbs of utterance, thought, or comparison, such as 言う (say/speak), 思う (think), and 比べる (compare), are used in the <i>ba</i>-form to give advance warning or explanation of the perspective or standpoint from which the statement or judgment that follows will be made.</div><div class="explanation">The <i>ba</i>-form expressions in (1) and (2) can be rephrased as 正直言って／言うと／言ったら and 比べて／比べると／比べたら, respectively. (3) can be rephrased as 考えてみると／みたら. The expression 思えば in (4), which means “when I think about it once again,” is used to take an emotional look back at the past. It cannot be rephrased with the <i>te</i>-form, たら, or と.</div><div class="explanation">As noted above, this usage of the <i>ba</i>-form consists mostly of idiomatic expressions that are rather fixed. Additional examples include はっきり言えば (frankly speaking/to put it bluntly), 極端に言えば (to put it in extreme terms), からみれば (from the viewpoint of), からすれば (from the standpoint of), and so on.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x79987"><span class="number">8. </span>V-ば〈suggestion, recommendation〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>《<ruby><rb>服</rb><rt>ふく</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>売</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>り<ruby><rb>場</rb><rt>ば</rt></ruby>で》</span>／<span class="translation">《at a clothing store》</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">A:</span>これなんかどうかなあ。</span>／<span class="translation">What about this one?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span><ruby><rb>着</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>てみれば。</span>／<span class="translation">Why don’t you try it on?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><span class="number">A:</span>ゆうべから、すごく<ruby><rb>頭</rb><rt>あたま</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>痛</rb><rt>いた</rt></ruby>いんだ。</span>／<span class="translation">I’ve had a terrible headache since yesterday evening.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>そんなに<ruby><rb>痛</rb><rt>いた</rt></ruby>いの？　<ruby><rb>会社</rb><rt>かい しゃ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>休</rb><rt>やす</rt></ruby>めば。</span>／<span class="translation">That bad, huh? Why don’t you take a day off?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><span class="number">A:</span>あ、これ<ruby><rb>間違</rb><rt>ま ちが</rt></ruby>ってる。</span>／<span class="translation">Oh, this is wrong.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span><ruby><rb>教</rb><rt>おし</rt></ruby>えてあげれば。</span>／<span class="translation">Why don’t you tell him?</span></div><div class="explanation">V-ば is pronounced with rising intonation and used to suggest that the listener take a particular action. When the speaker ends a sentence with V-ば, it often sounds like <span class="noSeparate">s/he</span> is unconcerned or has only passing interest in the matter at hand. Can be substituted with V-たらor V-たらどう. Used in casual spoken Japanese.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x80062"><span class="number">9. </span>...も...ば...も</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>心臓</rb><rt>しん ぞう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>悪</rb><rt>わる</rt></ruby>いくせに<ruby><rb>酒</rb><rt>さけ</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>飲</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>めばたばこも<ruby><rb>吸</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>う。</span>／<span class="translation">Even though he has a bad heart, he not only drinks but also smokes. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>器用</rb><rt>き よう</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>男</rb><rt>おとこ</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>料理</rb><rt>りょう り</rt></ruby>もできれば<ruby><rb>裁縫</rb><rt>さい ほう</rt></ruby>もできる。</span>／<span class="translation">He is good with his hands, and he not only cooks but also sews.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>勲章</rb><rt>くん しょう</rt></ruby>なんかもらっても、うれしくもなければ、<ruby><rb>名誉</rb><rt>めい よ</rt></ruby>だとも<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>わない。</span>／<span class="translation">Even if I were given a medal, I wouldn’t feel pleased or honored.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>動物</rb><rt>どう ぶつ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>好</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>きな<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>もいれば、<ruby><rb>嫌</rb><rt>きら</rt></ruby>いな<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>もいる。</span>／<span class="translation">Some people like animals, but some don’t. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>一生</rb><rt>いっ しょう</rt></ruby>にはいい<ruby><rb>時</rb><rt>とき</rt></ruby>もあれば<ruby><rb>悪</rb><rt>わる</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>時</rb><rt>とき</rt></ruby>もある。</span>／<span class="translation">We have both good and bad times in our lives. </span></div><div class="explanation">This pattern is used to list similar items for emphasis, as shown in (1)-(3), or to list contrasting items in order to express that there is a variety of cases, as shown in (4) and (5). These examples can be paraphrased using ...し, as in 酒も飲むしたばこも吸う (he drinks and moreover he smokes). Also, the first instance of も can be changed to が, as in 動物の好きな人がいれば嫌いな人もいる (some people like animals, but others don’t).</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x80104"><span class="number">10. </span>おもえば<span class="reference">→<a href="part0102.xhtml#idtitlex1x9030">【おもえば】</a></span></h2><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x80111"><span class="number">11. </span>...かとおもえば<span class="reference">→<a href="part0134.xhtml#idtitlex1x11725">【かとおもえば】</a></span></h2><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x80118"><span class="number">12. </span>...からいえば<span class="reference">→<a href="part0155.xhtml#idsubtitlex1x13074">【からいう】1</a></span></h2><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x80126"><span class="number">13. </span>...からすれば<span class="reference">→<a href="part0160.xhtml#idsubtitlex1x13353">【からする】1</a></span></h2><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x80134"><span class="number">14. </span>...からみれば<span class="reference">→<a href="part0167.xhtml#idsubtitlex1x13563">【からみる】1</a></span></h2><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x80142"><span class="number">15. </span>さえ...ば<span class="reference">→<a href="part0245.xhtml#idsubtitlex1x18916">【さえ】2</a></span></h2><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x80150"><span class="number">16. </span>ってば</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>お<ruby><rb>父</rb><rt>とう</rt></ruby>さんってば、<ruby><rb>早</rb><rt>はや</rt></ruby>く<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>てよ。</span>／<span class="translation">Oh Dad, hurry up and come!</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>絶対</rb><rt>ぜっ たい</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>正</rb><rt>ただ</rt></ruby>しいんだってば。</span>／<span class="translation">I’m telling you, I’m definitely right!</span></div><h4 class="reference">→<a href="part0434.xhtml#idtitlex1x37988">【ってば】</a></h4><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x80169"><span class="number">17. </span>...といえば<span class="reference">→<a href="part0533.xhtml#idtitlex1x50172">【といえば】</a></span></h2><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x80176"><span class="number">18. </span>...とすれば<span class="reference">→<a href="part0593.xhtml#idtitlex1x56525">【とすれば<sub class="Subscript">1</sub>】</a>、<a href="part0594.xhtml#idtitlex1x56560">【とすれば<sub class="Subscript">2</sub>】</a></span></h2><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x80187"><span class="number">19. </span>...となれば<span class="reference">→<a href="part0610.xhtml#idtitlex1x57862">【となれば】</a></span></h2><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x80194"><span class="number">20. </span>...ともなれば<span class="reference">→<a href="part0635.xhtml#idtitlex1x59406">【ともなれば】</a></span></h2><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x80201"><span class="number">21. </span>...ならば<span class="reference">→<a href="part0706.xhtml#idtitlex1x64870">【なら<sub class="Subscript">1</sub>】</a>、<a href="part0707.xhtml#idtitlex1x65111">【なら<sub class="Subscript">2</sub>】</a>、<a href="part0708.xhtml#idtitlex1x65888">【なら<sub class="Subscript">3</sub>】</a></span></h2><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x80215"><span class="number">22. </span>...にいわせれば<span class="reference">→<a href="part0747.xhtml#idtitlex1x69985">【にいわせれば】</a></span></h2><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x80222"><span class="number">23. </span>...にしてみれば<span class="reference">→<a href="part0790.xhtml#idtitlex1x71890">【にしてみれば】</a></span></h2><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x80229"><span class="number">24. </span>...ば...ほど</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>考</rb><rt>かんが</rt></ruby>えれば<ruby><rb>考</rb><rt>かんが</rt></ruby>えるほど<ruby><rb>分</rb><rt>わ</rt></ruby>からなくなる。</span>／<span class="translation">The more I think, the more confused I get. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べれば<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べるほど<ruby><rb>太</rb><rt>ふと</rt></ruby>る。</span>／<span class="translation">The more I eat, the more I gain weight.</span></div><h4 class="reference">→<a href="part0932.xhtml#idsubsubtitlex1x87993">【ほど】4b</a></h4><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x80250"><span class="number">25. </span>...も...ば</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>その<ruby><rb>部品</rb><rt>ぶ ひん</rt></ruby>なら 1000 <ruby><rb>円</rb><rt>えん</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>だ</rt></ruby>せば<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>えるよ。</span>／<span class="translation">You can buy this part for only 1,000 yen. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>こんな<ruby><rb>作業</rb><rt>さ ぎょう</rt></ruby>は5<ruby><rb>分</rb><rt>ふん</rt></ruby>もあれば<ruby><rb>終</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>わる。</span>／<span class="translation">It would take only five minutes to finish a job like this. </span></div><h4 class="reference">→<a href="part0975.xhtml#idsubsubtitlex1x95413">【も】4d</a></h4><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x80271"><span class="number">26. </span>...も...あれば...もある<span class="reference">→<a href="part0975.xhtml#idsubtitlex1x95877">【も】10</a></span></h2></body></html>