<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ことなしに</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0223.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ことなく】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0225.xhtml">【ことに】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x17753">【ことなしに】</h1><h4 class="info">［V-ることなしに］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>努力</rb><rt>ど りょく</rt></ruby>することなしに<ruby><rb>成功</rb><rt>せい こう</rt></ruby>はありえない。</span>／<span class="translation">Success is impossible without effort.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>誰</rb><rt>だれ</rt></ruby>しも<ruby><rb>他人</rb><rt>た にん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>傷</rb><rt>きず</rt></ruby>つけることなしには<ruby><rb>生</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>きていけない。</span>／<span class="translation">No one can live without hurting others. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>リスクを<ruby><rb>負</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>うことなしに<ruby><rb>新</rb><rt>あたら</rt></ruby>しい<ruby><rb>道</rb><rt>みち</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>切</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>り<ruby><rb>開</rb><rt>ひら</rt></ruby>くことはできないだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">A new trail cannot be blazed without taking risks.</span></div><div class="explanation">Followed by expressions that deny the possibility of something, in the pattern XすることなしにYできない. Means “without doing X, it’s impossible to do Y” (XをしなければYができない), or in other words, “if one intends to do Y, then doing X is unavoidable” (Yをしようと思ったら、Xをすることは避けられない). A formal expression.</div></body></html>