<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>とすると</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0591.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【とする<sub class="variation">2</sub>】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0593.xhtml">【とすれば<sub class="variation">1</sub>】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x56392">【とすると】</h1><div class="explanation">すると is attached to the particle と and refers to the preceding clause. Means “if we assume that to be a fact,” or “in the event that...occurs,” or “based on the present situation/facts.” Followed by the expression of a judgment that would hold in the event that the preceding assumption is made. This pattern is used to establish a set of hypothetical conditions and conveys the meaning “in the event that a certain assumption is made.” と by itself does not have this meaning, so とすると can hardly ever be replaced by と.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x56407"><span class="number">1. </span>...とすると〈not-yet-realized condition〉</h2><h4 class="info">［N／Na　だとすると］</h4><h4 class="info">［A／V　とすると］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>医学部</rb><rt>い がく ぶ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>はい</rt></ruby>るとすると、<ruby><rb>一体</rb><rt>いっ たい</rt></ruby>どのくらいお<ruby><rb>金</rb><rt>かね</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>必要</rb><rt>ひつ よう</rt></ruby>なのだろうか。</span>／<span class="translation">If I were to enter the school of medicine, I wonder just how much money I would need.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>もし、<ruby><rb>今後</rb><rt>こん ご</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>雨</rb><rt>あめ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>降</rb><rt>ふ</rt></ruby>らないとすると、<ruby><rb>水不足</rb><rt>みず ぶ そく</rt></ruby>になるのは<ruby><rb>避</rb><rt>さ</rt></ruby>けられないだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">If the lack of rainfall continues, it probably won't be possible to avoid a water shortage.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>仮</rb><rt>かり</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>被告</rb><rt>ひ こく</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>っていることが<ruby><rb>事実</rb><rt>じ じつ</rt></ruby>だとすると、<ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>嘘</rb><rt>うそ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>証言</rb><rt>しょう げん</rt></ruby>をしていることになる。</span>／<span class="translation">If we assume that the defendant is telling the truth, that means her testimony is a lie. </span></div><div class="explanation">Means “if we assume that such-and-such is a fact/will occur,” even though the speaker doesn’t actually know whether or not the thing in question is a fact/will occur. Often accompanied by 仮に (supposing that) or もし (if).</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x56445"><span class="number">2. </span>...とすると〈already-realized condition〉</h2><h4 class="info">［N／Na　だとすると］</h4><h4 class="info">［A／V　とすると］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>1<ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>待</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>ってまだ<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>連絡</rb><rt>れん らく</rt></ruby>もないとすると、<ruby><rb>途中</rb><rt>と ちゅう</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>事故</rb><rt>じ こ</rt></ruby>にでもあったのかもしれない。</span>／<span class="translation">If there hasn’t been any word from <span class="noSeparate">him/her</span> whatsoever after waiting a full hour, it could mean that there was an accident or something along the way. </span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>図書館</rb><rt>と しょ かん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>明日</rb><rt>あした</rt></ruby>から2<ruby><rb>週間</rb><rt>しゅう かん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>休館</rb><rt>きゅう かん</rt></ruby>になります。</span>／<span class="translation">The library is going to close tomorrow for two weeks. </span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>2<ruby><rb>週間</rb><rt>しゅう かん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>休館</rb><rt>きゅう かん</rt></ruby>だとすると<ruby><rb>今日</rb><rt>きょう</rt></ruby>のうちに<ruby><rb>必要</rb><rt>ひつ よう</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>本</rb><rt>ほん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>借</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>りておかなければならないな。</span>／<span class="translation"> If it's going to be closed for two weeks, then I guess I’ll have to borrow the books I need today.  </span></div><div class="explanation">Means “taking into account the current situation/facts,” based on the actual situation or information received from another party. かりに (supposing that) and もし (if) do not combine with this usage.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x56486"><span class="number">3. </span>（だ）とすると</h2><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>今年</rb><rt>ことし</rt></ruby>の2<ruby><rb>月</rb><rt>がつ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>平均</rb><rt>へい きん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>気温</rb><rt>き おん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>平年</rb><rt>へい ねん</rt></ruby>より<ruby><rb>数度</rb><rt>すう ど</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>高</rb><rt>たか</rt></ruby>いそうですよ。</span>／<span class="translation">They say that this year the average temperatures in February have been several degrees above normal.  </span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>とすると、<ruby><rb>桜</rb><rt>さくら</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>開花</rb><rt>かい か</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>早</rb><rt>はや</rt></ruby>くなるでしょうね。</span>／<span class="translation">If that’s so, then the cherry trees will probably bloom early, won’t they?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>脱線</rb><rt>だっせん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>事故</rb><rt>じ こ</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>今日</rb><rt>きょう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>一日</rb><rt>いち にち</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>電車</rb><rt>でん しゃ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>不通</rb><rt>ふ つう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>見込</rb><rt>み こ</rt></ruby>みだという。だとすると、<ruby><rb>道路</rb><rt>どう ろ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>相当</rb><rt>そう とう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>混雑</rb><rt>こん ざつ</rt></ruby>するだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">I heard that, because of a derailment, the trains are expected to stop running all day today. If that’s the case, the roads will probably be pretty congested.  </span></div><div class="explanation">Refers to the previous sentence or a statement made by another person and means “taking into account the present situation/facts.”</div></body></html>