<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>きっかけ</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0178.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【きく】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0180.xhtml">【きっと】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x14285">【きっかけ】</h1><h4 class="info">［Nをきっかけに（して）］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>卒業</rb><rt>そつ ぎょう</rt></ruby>をきっかけに<ruby><rb>髪</rb><rt>かみ</rt></ruby>をきった。</span>／<span class="translation">She had her hair cut for her graduation.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>就職</rb><rt>しゅう しょく</rt></ruby>をきっかけにして、<ruby><rb>生活</rb><rt>せい かつ</rt></ruby>をかえた。</span>／<span class="translation">Getting a job was what changed his life.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>日本</rb><rt>に ほん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>朝鮮戦争</rb><rt>ちょう せん せん そう</rt></ruby>をきっかけにして<ruby><rb>高度</rb><rt>こう ど</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>成長</rb><rt>せい ちょう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>時代</rb><rt>じ だい</rt></ruby>にはいったと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>われる。</span>／<span class="translation">It is said that the Korean War gave the impetus for Japan’s coming into a period of high economic growth.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>こんなところで<ruby><rb>同</rb><rt>おな</rt></ruby>じ<ruby><rb>高校</rb><rt>こう こう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>出身</rb><rt>しゅっ しん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>かた</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>出会</rb><rt>で あ</rt></ruby>うとは<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>いませんでした。これをきっかけに<ruby><rb>今後</rb><rt>こん ご</rt></ruby>ともよろしくお<ruby><rb>願</rb><rt>ねが</rt></ruby>いいたします。</span>／<span class="translation">I didn’t imagine I would meet someone who went to the same high school here. I hope this will be the start of a good relationship for both of us.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses “a chance, a basis for something, or an opportunity.”</div></body></html>