<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>それはそれとして</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0354.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【それはそれでいい】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0356.xhtml">【それほど】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x28029">【それはそれとして】</h1><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>万引</rb><rt>まん びき</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>問題</rb><rt>もん だい</rt></ruby>なのはわかります。しかしそれはそれとして、もう<ruby><rb>少</rb><rt>すこ</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>広</rb><rt>ひろ</rt></ruby>く<ruby><rb>青少年</rb><rt>せい しょう ねん</rt></ruby>をとりまく<ruby><rb>社会</rb><rt>しゃ かい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>環境</rb><rt>かん きょう</rt></ruby>について<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はな</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>合</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>いたいと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>います。</span>／<span class="translation">I know shoplifting is a problem. But leaving that aside, I’d like to discuss the social environment of young people from a slightly broader perspective.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>今月</rb><rt>こん げつ</rt></ruby>かなりの<ruby><rb>赤字</rb><rt>あか じ</rt></ruby>になっているのは<ruby><rb>人件費</rb><rt>じん けん ひ</rt></ruby>がかかりすぎているからじゃないか。</span>／<span class="translation">Isn’t the reason we’re so far in the red this month that we’re spending too much on personnel?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>まあそうだけど、それはそれとして、<ruby><rb>円高</rb><rt>えん だか</rt></ruby>のことも<ruby><rb>考</rb><rt>かんが</rt></ruby>えないといけないんじゃないかな。</span>／<span class="translation">Well, yes, but be that as it may, I think we also have to take into consideration the rising yen.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to acknowledge a certain matter or situation and shift the viewpoint slightly to talk about a different matter/situation.</div></body></html>