<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>っぽい</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0434.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ってば】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0436.xhtml">【つまり】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x38096">【っぽい】</h1><h4 class="info">［Nっぽい］</h4><h4 class="info">［Rっぽい］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>男</rb><rt>おとこ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>白</rb><rt>しろ</rt></ruby>っぽい<ruby><rb>服</rb><rt>ふく</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>着</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>ていた。</span>／<span class="translation">The man was wearing whitish clothes.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>あの<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>忘</rb><rt>わす</rt></ruby>れっぽくて<ruby><rb>困</rb><rt>こま</rt></ruby>る。</span>／<span class="translation">It’s a problem because he can be forgetful.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>30にもなって、そんなことで<ruby><rb>怒</rb><rt>おこ</rt></ruby>るなんて<ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>っぽいね。</span>／<span class="translation">To be already thirty years old and get angry over something like that is really childish, isn’t it?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>この<ruby><rb>牛乳</rb><rt>ぎゅう にゅう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>水</rb><rt>みず</rt></ruby>っぽくてまずいよ。</span>／<span class="translation">This milk is watery and tastes awful.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>死</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>ぬだとか<ruby><rb>葬式</rb><rt>そう しき</rt></ruby>だとか、<ruby><rb>湿</rb><rt>しめ</rt></ruby>っぽい<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はなし</rt></ruby>はもうやめよう。</span>／<span class="translation">Let’s quit talking about such depressing things like death and funerals.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used with a noun or verb stem to form <i>i</i>-adjectives to express the meaning “feels that way” or “has the tendency to.”</div><div class="explanation">Used with nouns that express colors, such as 赤(red), 白(white), 黒(black), 黄色(yellow), 茶色(brown), to express the meaning “has that color/characteristic” or “close to that color/characteristic,” as in (1). Also used with verb stems such as 怒る(get angry)／ひがむ(have an inferiority complex) ／ぐちる(grumble) ／忘れる(forget) to express the characteristics of someone who “always does ...” or “often does ...,” as in (2). Also used with 子供(child) ／女(woman) ／男(man) ／やくざ(the Japanese mafia) and so on, to express the meaning “like a child/<i>yakuza</i>”<i> </i>or “very manly (man-like)/womanly (woman-like),” as in (3). </div><div class="explanation">In addition, there are usages like 水っぽい (too watery and thin), 湿っぽい (seems damp, gloomy), and 熱っぽい (seems to have a temperature/feverish). 子供っぽい／水っぽいhave negative connotations. When expressing a positive feeling, 子供らしい／みずみずしい are used.</div></body></html>