<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>のであった</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0862.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ので】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0864.xhtml">【のである】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x77301">【のであった】</h1><h4 class="info">［N／Na　なのであった］</h4><h4 class="info">［A／V　のであった］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>大学</rb><rt>だい がく</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>辞</rb><rt>や</rt></ruby>めて<ruby><rb>故郷</rb><rt>こ きょう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>帰</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>った。ようやく<ruby><rb>父</rb><rt>ちち</rt></ruby>のあとを<ruby><rb>受</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>けて<ruby><rb>家業</rb><rt>か ぎょう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>継</rb><rt>つ</rt></ruby>ぐ<ruby><rb>決心</rb><rt>けっ しん</rt></ruby>がついたのであった。</span>／<span class="translation">He dropped out of college and went back to his hometown. This was because he had finally decided to take over the family business from his father.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>ついに<ruby><rb>両国</rb><rt>りょう こく</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>平和</rb><rt>へい わ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>訪</rb><rt>おとず</rt></ruby>れたのであった。</span>／<span class="translation">At last, peace came to the two nations.</span></div><div class="explanation">のであった is a formal way of saying のだった. Used when the speaker looks back at the past with some kind of emotion.</div><h4 class="reference">→<a href="part0859.xhtml#idsubtitlex1x76885">【のだった】2</a></h4></body></html>