<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>にたる</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0804.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【にたりない】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0806.xhtml">【にちがいない】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x72710">【にたる】</h1><h4 class="info">［V-るにたるN］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>昨今</rb><rt>さっ こん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>政治家</rb><rt>せい じ か</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>私利私欲</rb><rt>し り し よく</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>走</rb><rt>はし</rt></ruby>り、<ruby><rb>尊敬</rb><rt>そん けい</rt></ruby>するにたる<ruby><rb>人物</rb><rt>じん ぶつ</rt></ruby>はいなくなってしまった。</span>／<span class="translation">Nowadays politicians seek their own interests, and so there is no one worth respecting. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>学校</rb><rt>がっ こう</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>たちが<ruby><rb>信頼</rb><rt>しん らい</rt></ruby>するにたる<ruby><rb>教師</rb><rt>きょう し</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>出会</rb><rt>で あ</rt></ruby>えるかどうかが<ruby><rb>問題</rb><rt>もん だい</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">Whether children can meet a trustworthy teacher at school is the problem.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>一生</rb><rt>いっ しょう</rt></ruby>のうちに<ruby><rb>語</rb><rt>かた</rt></ruby>るに<ruby><rb>足</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>る<ruby><rb>冒険</rb><rt>ぼう けん</rt></ruby>などそうあるものではない。</span>／<span class="translation">In our life there are not many adventures worth talking about.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>会議</rb><rt>かい ぎ</rt></ruby>では<ruby><rb>皆</rb><rt>みな</rt></ruby>それぞれ<ruby><rb>勝手</rb><rt>かっ て</rt></ruby>なことをいうばかりで、<ruby><rb>耳</rb><rt>みみ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>傾</rb><rt>かたむ</rt></ruby>けるに<ruby><rb>足</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>る<ruby><rb>意見</rb><rt>い けん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>なかった。</span>／<span class="translation">In the meeting everybody just made self-centered remarks, and no one made a point worth listening to.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>すべてが<ruby><rb>眠</rb><rt>ねむ</rt></ruby>ったような<ruby><rb>平和</rb><rt>へい わ</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>島</rb><rt>しま</rt></ruby>では、<ruby><rb>報道</rb><rt>ほう どう</rt></ruby>するに<ruby><rb>足</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>るニュースなどなにもなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">On the peaceful island where everything seems to be asleep, there was no news worth reporting.</span></div><div class="explanation">With a specific type of verb such as 尊敬する(respect) or 信頼する(trust), expresses the meaning of “it deserves enough to do something” or “it is suitable to do something.” A formal, written expression.</div></body></html>