<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ことだし</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0217.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ことだから】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0219.xhtml">【ことだろう】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x17522">【ことだし】</h1><h4 class="info">［N／Na　であることだし］</h4><h4 class="info">［Na なことだし］</h4><h4 class="info">［A／V　ことだし］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>雨</rb><rt>あめ</rt></ruby>がふってきそうだから、きょうは<ruby><rb>散歩</rb><rt>さん ぽ</rt></ruby>はやめておこうか。こどもたちもかぜをひいていることだし。</span>／<span class="translation">Since it looks like it’s going to rain, why don’t we put off going for a walk today? Besides, the children have colds. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>おいしそうな<ruby><rb>料理</rb><rt>りょう り</rt></ruby>もでてきたことですし、<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>のへたなごあいさつはこのへんで<ruby><rb>終</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>わりにしたいと<ruby><rb>存</rb><rt>ぞん</rt></ruby>じます。</span>／<span class="translation">With all this delicious food ready to eat, I will put an end here to my clumsy remarks.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>委員</rb><rt>い いん</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>大体</rb><rt>だい たい</rt></ruby>そろったことだし、<ruby><rb>予定</rb><rt>よ てい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>過</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>ぎているので、そろそろ<ruby><rb>委員会</rb><rt>い いん かい</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>始</rb><rt>はじ</rt></ruby>めてはいかがですか。</span>／<span class="translation">Since most of the committee members are present, and we are already a little behind schedule, how would it be if we started the meeting?</span></div><div class="explanation">Attaches to a clause. This construction combines ことだ+し and is used when describing the conditions or circumstances that form the reason or basis for some kind of judgment, decision, or hope. ことですし, as in (2), is a more polite form. Sometimes two reasons are stated, as in (3), sometimes one reason is stated, as in (2), and sometimes the reason is tacked on at the end as additional information, as in (1). Although this is a spoken language expression, it is more formal than using only し. </div></body></html>