<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>よかった</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part1033.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ようやく】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part1035.xhtml">【よかろう】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x103967">【よかった】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x103969"><span class="number">1. </span>V-てよかった</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>あ、<ruby><rb>雨</rb><rt>あめ</rt></ruby>だ。かさを<ruby><rb>持</rb><rt>も</rt></ruby>ってきてよかった。</span>／<span class="translation">Oh, it’s raining. I’m glad I brought my umbrella.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>財布</rb><rt>さい ふ</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>つかってよかったですね。</span>／<span class="translation">I’m pleased that you found your wallet.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>今日</rb><rt>きょう</rt></ruby>はお<ruby><rb>天気</rb><rt>てん き</rt></ruby>になってよかった。おかげで<ruby><rb>予定</rb><rt>よ てい</rt></ruby>どおり<ruby><rb>遠足</rb><rt>えん そく</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ける。</span>／<span class="translation">It’s good that the weather turned out nice today. Thanks to that we can go on our trip as planned.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>友達</rb><rt>とも だち</rt></ruby>もできたしいろんな<ruby><rb>経験</rb><rt>けい けん</rt></ruby>もできたし、<ruby><rb>本当</rb><rt>ほん  とう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>日本</rb><rt>に ほん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>てよかったと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>っている。</span>／<span class="translation">Because I made friends and had a variety of experiences, I really am glad that I came to Japan.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>あの<ruby><rb>映画</rb><rt>えい が</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>かなくてよかったよ。<ruby><rb>全然</rb><rt>ぜん ぜん</rt></ruby>おもしろくなかったんだって。</span>／<span class="translation">It’s good that you didn’t go to see that film. It really wasn’t any good.</span></div><div class="explanation">Demonstrates the speaker’s positive evaluation that fact that the action denoted by the verb or an event has occurred is a good thing. よかった is in the past form but it demonstrates a current feeling.  </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x104012"><span class="number">2. </span>V-ばよかった</h2><h3 class="subsubtitle" id="idsubsubtitlex1x104015"><span class="number">a. </span>V-ばよかった</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>しまった。あいつの<ruby><rb>電話</rb><rt>でん わ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>番号</rb><rt>ばんごう</rt></ruby>をメモしておけばよかった。</span>／<span class="translation">Damn it! I wish I’d made a note of that guy’s telephone number.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>あの<ruby><rb>服</rb><rt>ふく</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>っておけばよかった。もう<ruby><rb>売</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>り<ruby><rb>切</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>れてしまったんだって。</span>／<span class="translation">I wish I’d bought those clothes. They say they’ve already sold out.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>野菜</rb><rt>や さい</rt></ruby>がしなびている。<ruby><rb>冷蔵庫</rb><rt>れい ぞう こ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>れておいたらよかった。</span>／<span class="translation">The vegetables are wilting. I should have put them in the refrigerator.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>一人</rb><rt>ひとり</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>悩</rb><rt>なや</rt></ruby>んでいないで、もっと<ruby><rb>早</rb><rt>はや</rt></ruby>く<ruby><rb>相談</rb><rt>そう だん</rt></ruby>しに<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>ればよかった。</span>／<span class="translation">Instead of worrying by myself, I wish I had come for consultation sooner.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>田中</rb><rt>た なか</rt></ruby>さんも<ruby><rb>誘</rb><rt>さそ</rt></ruby>ってあげたらよかったね。</span>／<span class="translation">We should have invited Tanaka-san too, shouldn’t we?</span></div><div class="explanation">In the forms V-ばよかった and V-たらよかった, this expresses a feeling of regret that something which was not done ought to have been.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x104058"><span class="number">b. </span>V-なければよかった</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>こんな<ruby><rb>服</rb><rt>ふく</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>わなければよかった。<ruby><rb>派手</rb><rt>は で</rt></ruby>すぎてとても<ruby><rb>着</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>られない。</span>／<span class="translation">I shouldn’t have bought these clothes. They’re too gaudy for me to wear.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>こんなごちそうが<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>るんなら、さっき<ruby><rb>間食</rb><rt>かん しょく</rt></ruby>しなければよかった。</span>／<span class="translation">I shouldn’t have been snacking before such a feast.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>あいつ、<ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>結婚</rb><rt>けっ こん</rt></ruby>することを<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>らなかったのか。それなら<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>わなかったらよかった。</span>／<span class="translation">Didn’t he know she was getting married? If that’s the case, I wish I hadn’t said anything.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>きのうはあんなに<ruby><rb>飲</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>まなければよかった。<ruby><rb>二日</rb><rt>ふつか</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>酔</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>いで<ruby><rb>頭</rb><rt>あたま</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>痛</rb><rt>いた</rt></ruby>い。</span>／<span class="translation">I wish I hadn’t drunk so much yesterday. My head hurts with the hangover.</span></div><div class="explanation">In the forms V-なければよかった and V-なかったらよかった, expresses the speaker’s feelings of regret at having done something they didn’t ought to have.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x104095"><span class="number">3. </span>V-ばよかったのに</h2><h3 class="subsubtitle" id="idsubsubtitlex1x104098"><span class="number">a. </span>V-ばよかったのに</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>昨日</rb><rt>きのう</rt></ruby>のパーティーにあなたも<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>ればよかったのに。<ruby><rb>楽</rb><rt>たの</rt></ruby>しかったよ。</span>／<span class="translation">You should have come to the party yesterday. It was fun.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>そんなにやりたくないのなら「いやだ」と<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>えばよかったのに。</span>／<span class="translation">If you didn’t want to do it so much, you should have just said “no.”</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>今日</rb><rt>きょう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>花子</rb><rt>はな こ</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>誘</rb><rt>さそ</rt></ruby>ったらよかったのに。あの<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>このごろ<ruby><rb>暇</rb><rt>ひま</rt></ruby>だって<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ってたよ。</span>／<span class="translation">You ought to have invited Hanako too today. She said she has been free recently.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>田中</rb><rt>た なか</rt></ruby>じゃなくて<ruby><rb>君</rb><rt>きみ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>立候補</rb><rt>りっ こう ほ</rt></ruby>したらよかったのに。<ruby><rb>田中</rb><rt>た なか</rt></ruby>じゃたぶん<ruby><rb>勝</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>てないよ。</span>／<span class="translation">You ought to have announced your candidacy, not Tanaka. Tanaka probably won’t win. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>きたくなかったのなら、<ruby><rb>断</rb><rt>ことわ</rt></ruby>ればよかったのに。</span>／<span class="translation">If you didn’t want to go, you should have refused.</span></div><div class="explanation">In the forms V-ばよかったのに and V-たらよかったのに, expresses the speaker’s feelings of disappointment and criticism at something the listener did not do in reality but ought to have done.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x104141"><span class="number">b. </span>V-なければよかったのに</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>そんなこと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>わなければよかったのに。</span>／<span class="translation">You didn’t ought to have said such a thing.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>あんな<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>会</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>いに<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>かなければよかったのに。</span>／<span class="translation">You shouldn’t have gone to meet such a person.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>風邪</rb><rt>か ぜ</rt></ruby>をひいているのなら、スキーなんかしなかったらよかったのに。</span>／<span class="translation">If you had caught a cold, you shouldn’t have gone skiing.  </span></div><div class="explanation">In the forms V-なければよかったのに and V-なかったらよかったのに, expresses the speaker’s feelings of disappointment and criticism at something the listener has done but didn’t ought to have.</div></body></html>