<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ず</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0283.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【しょうがない】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0285.xhtml">【すえに】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x22263">【ず】</h1><div class="explanation">Comes from the auxiliary verb ず, which is used in literary language. Expresses negation. Can be used only in written language and idiomatic expressions. In spoken language, なくて and ないで are used. Created by changing the ない in V-ない to ず. する becomes せず.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x22275"><span class="number">1. </span>V-ず</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>途中</rb><rt>と ちゅう</rt></ruby>であきらめず、<ruby><rb>最後</rb><rt>さい ご</rt></ruby>までがんばってください。</span>／<span class="translation">Don’t give up in the middle—please keep going until the end.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>1<ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>待</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>っても<ruby><rb>雨</rb><rt>あめ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>止</rb><rt>や</rt></ruby>まず、ぬれて<ruby><rb>帰</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>った。</span>／<span class="translation">The rain wouldn’t stop even after I waited for an hour, so I went home drenched. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>出発</rb><rt>しゅっ ぱつ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>前日</rb><rt>ぜん じつ</rt></ruby>まで<ruby><rb>予約</rb><rt>よ やく</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>取</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>れず、<ruby><rb>心配</rb><rt>しん ぱい</rt></ruby>させられた。</span>／<span class="translation">I couldn’t get a reservation until the day before my departure, so I was really worried. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>だれにきいても<ruby><rb>住所</rb><rt>じゅう しょ</rt></ruby>がわからず、<ruby><rb>困</rb><rt>こま</rt></ruby>った。</span>／<span class="translation">No matter who I asked, no one knew the address, so I was in a real fix. </span></div><div class="explanation">Means the same as V-ないで or V-なくて. (1) is an example of simply putting two clauses side by side to mean “don’t give up.” In many cases, as in (3) and (4), the cause-and-effect relation between the first and second clauses is clear, and V-ず is used as an expression to indicate a reason. Although V-ず is used in spoken language, it is somewhat formal and has the tone of written language.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x22312"><span class="number">2. </span>...ず、...ず</h2><h4 class="info">［A-からず、A-からず］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-ず、V-ず］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>飲</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>まず<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>わずで<ruby><rb>三日</rb><rt>みっか</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>間</rb><rt>かん</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>山中</rb><rt>さん ちゅう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>歩</rb><rt>ある</rt></ruby>きつづけた。</span>／<span class="translation">I continued to walk all over the mountains without eating or drinking for three whole days.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>その<ruby><rb>時</rb><rt>とき</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>はあわてず<ruby><rb>騒</rb><rt>さわ</rt></ruby>がず<ruby><rb>一言</rb><rt>ひと こと</rt></ruby>「<ruby><rb>失礼</rb><rt>しつ れい</rt></ruby>しました」と<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>って<ruby><rb>部屋</rb><rt>へ や</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>ていった。</span>／<span class="translation">At the time, he didn’t get flustered or make a scene, he just left the room with a single remark: “Excuse me.”</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>展覧会</rb><rt>てん らん かい</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>出品</rb><rt>しゅっ ぴん</rt></ruby>されている<ruby><rb>作品</rb><rt>さく ひん</rt></ruby>はいずれも<ruby><rb>負</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>けず<ruby><rb>劣</rb><rt>おと</rt></ruby>らずすばらしい。</span>／<span class="translation">All the works presented at the exhibition are equally wonderful. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>独立</rb><rt>どく りつ</rt></ruby>した<ruby><rb>子供達</rb><rt>こ ども たち</rt></ruby>とは、つかず<ruby><rb>離</rb><rt>はな</rt></ruby>れずのいい<ruby><rb>関係</rb><rt>かん けい</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">I have a good relationship with my children, who are now on their own—not too close, but not too far.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>日本</rb><rt>に ほん</rt></ruby>の5<ruby><rb>月</rb><rt>がつ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>暑</rb><rt>あつ</rt></ruby>からず、<ruby><rb>寒</rb><rt>さむ</rt></ruby>からずちょうどいい<ruby><rb>気候</rb><rt>き こう</rt></ruby>です。</span>／<span class="translation">The climate in Japan in May is just right—not too hot but not too cold. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>客</rb><rt>きゃく</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>多</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>からず、<ruby><rb>少</rb><rt>すく</rt></ruby>なからずほどほどだ。</span>／<span class="translation">The number of clients is just right—not too many and not too few. </span></div><div class="explanation">Means “neither X nor Y.” In some cases words with similar meaning are listed, as in (1), (2), and (3), and in other cases words with contrasting meaning are listed, as in (4), (5), and (6). (3) means that after comparing several items it is found that “all of them are equally wonderful.” (4) means “keeping a suitable distance,” and (5) means “neither hot nor cold.” Idiomatic expressions. Other examples include 鳴かず飛ばず (fall into obscurity), etc.</div></body></html>