<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>てん</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0511.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【てやる】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0513.xhtml">【と<sub class="variation">1</sub>】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x47357">【てん】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x47359"><span class="number">1. </span>...てん</h2><h4 class="info">［Nのてん］</h4><h4 class="info">［Na なてん］</h4><h4 class="info">［A-いてん］</h4><h4 class="info">［Vてん］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>兄</rb><rt>あに</rt></ruby>より<ruby><rb>弟</rb><rt>おとうと</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>ほう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>行動力</rb><rt>こう どう りょく</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>点</rb><rt>てん</rt></ruby>でまさっている。</span>／<span class="translation">The younger brother outdoes the older one when it comes to getting things done.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>新</rb><rt>あたら</rt></ruby>しい<ruby><rb>車</rb><rt>くるま</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>ほう</rt></ruby>が、<ruby><rb>燃費</rb><rt>ねん ぴ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>点</rb><rt>てん</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>安上</rb><rt>やす あ</rt></ruby>がりだ。</span>／<span class="translation">A new car is more economical, if you consider fuel efficiency.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>値段</rb><rt>ね だん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>点</rb><rt>てん</rt></ruby>では、A<ruby><rb>電気</rb><rt>でん き</rt></ruby>のもののほうが<ruby><rb>安</rb><rt>やす</rt></ruby>いが、<ruby><rb>性能</rb><rt>せい のう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>点</rb><rt>てん</rt></ruby>では、B<ruby><rb>電気</rb><rt>でん き</rt></ruby>のほうがよくできている。</span>／<span class="translation">In terms of price, the products at Electronics Store A are cheaper, but in terms of performance, the ones at Electronics Store B are better made.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>この<ruby><rb>種類</rb><rt>しゅ るい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>犬</rb><rt>いぬ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>性格</rb><rt>せい かく</rt></ruby>のやさしい<ruby><rb>点</rb><rt>てん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>好</rb><rt>この</rt></ruby>まれている。</span>／<span class="translation">This breed of dog is well-liked for its gentle disposition.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>この<ruby><rb>小説</rb><rt>しょう せつ</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>現代</rb><rt>げん だい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>世相</rb><rt>せ そう</rt></ruby>をよくとらえている<ruby><rb>点</rb><rt>てん</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>評価</rb><rt>ひょう か</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>高</rb><rt>たか</rt></ruby>い。</span>／<span class="translation">This novel is highly praised for the way it captures the essence of the present times.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>経験</rb><rt>けい けん</rt></ruby>がある<ruby><rb>点</rb><rt>てん</rt></ruby>で、<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>のほうがこの<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>向</rb><rt>む</rt></ruby>いている。</span>／<span class="translation">The fact that he has experience makes him better suited for this work (than other applicants).</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（7）</span><ruby><rb>若</rb><rt>わか</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>社員</rb><rt>しゃ いん</rt></ruby>がたくさん<ruby><rb>活躍</rb><rt>かつ やく</rt></ruby>している<ruby><rb>点</rb><rt>てん</rt></ruby>で、この<ruby><rb>会社</rb><rt>かい しゃ</rt></ruby>はおもしろそうだ。</span>／<span class="translation">The fact that young employees are so actively involved makes this company seem interesting to me.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（8）</span>この<ruby><rb>点</rb><rt>てん</rt></ruby>でみんなの<ruby><rb>意見</rb><rt>い けん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>分</rb><rt>わ</rt></ruby>かれた。</span>／<span class="translation">People’s opinions were divided on this point.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to highlight one particular characteristic of something, out of many.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x47428"><span class="number">2. </span>...というてん</h2><h4 class="info">［Nというてん］</h4><h4 class="info">［Na だというてん］</h4><h4 class="info">［A-いというてん］</h4><h4 class="info">［Vというてん］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>設計</rb><rt>せっ けい</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>創造性</rb><rt>そう ぞう せい</rt></ruby>という<ruby><rb>点</rb><rt>てん</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>高</rb><rt>たか</rt></ruby>く<ruby><rb>評価</rb><rt>ひょう か</rt></ruby>された。</span>／<span class="translation">His designs are praised for their originality.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>この<ruby><rb>会社</rb><rt>かい しゃ</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>給料</rb><rt>きゅう りょう</rt></ruby>はいいが、<ruby><rb>労働</rb><rt>ろう どう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>条件</rb><rt>じょう けん</rt></ruby>がきびしいという<ruby><rb>点</rb><rt>てん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>気</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>になる。</span>／<span class="translation">It’s true that this company pays well, but the harsh working conditions are a point of concern.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>この<ruby><rb>犬</rb><rt>いぬ</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>性格</rb><rt>せい かく</rt></ruby>がやさしいという<ruby><rb>点</rb><rt>てん</rt></ruby>で、<ruby><rb>人気</rb><rt>にん き</rt></ruby>がある。</span>／<span class="translation">This dog is popular for the gentleness of its disposition.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>この<ruby><rb>計画</rb><rt>けい かく</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>がたくさん<ruby><rb>必要</rb><rt>ひつ よう</rt></ruby>だという<ruby><rb>点</rb><rt>てん</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>問題</rb><rt>もん だい</rt></ruby>がある。</span>／<span class="translation">The fact that this plan requires many people is a problem. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>経験</rb><rt>けい けん</rt></ruby>があるという<ruby><rb>点</rb><rt>てん</rt></ruby>で、<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>のほうがこの<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>向</rb><rt>む</rt></ruby>いている。</span>／<span class="translation">The fact that he has experience makes him better suited for this work (than the other applicants).</span></div><div class="explanation">This pattern has the same meaning as Usage 1 of ...てん (above) but uses という as a connector. という can be inserted after a noun, but it is most often used to connect てん with a clause. という does not have to be used with verbs and adjectives, but it must be used when nouns and <i>na</i>-adjectives are followed by the predicative だ.</div></body></html>