<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>きる</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0183.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【きり】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0185.xhtml">【きわまりない】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x14575">【きる】</h1><div class="explanation">Attaches to a verb stem and adds various meanings to the action.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x14590"><span class="number">1. </span>R-きる〈completion〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>お<ruby><rb>金</rb><rt>かね</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>使</rb><rt>つか</rt></ruby>いきってしまった。</span>／<span class="translation">I ran out of money.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>山道</rb><rt>やま みち</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>登</rb><rt>のぼ</rt></ruby>りきったところに<ruby><rb>小屋</rb><rt>こ や</rt></ruby>があった。</span>／<span class="translation">At the end of the mountain trail was a small hut.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>長編</rb><rt>ちょう へん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>冒険</rb><rt>ぼう けん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>小説</rb><rt>しょう せつ</rt></ruby>を1<ruby><rb>週間</rb><rt>しゅう かん</rt></ruby>かけて<ruby><rb>読</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>み<ruby><rb>切</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>った。</span>／<span class="translation">I read an entire adventure novel in a week.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses “doing something to the utmost.”</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x14624"><span class="number">2. </span>R-きる〈thoroughly〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>無理</rb><rt>む り</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>をして<ruby><rb>疲</rb><rt>つか</rt></ruby>れきってしまった。</span>／<span class="translation">I was exhausted from the excessive work load.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>そんな<ruby><rb>分</rb><rt>わ</rt></ruby>かりきったことをいつまで<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>っているんだ。</span>／<span class="translation">How long are you going to keep telling me such obvious things?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>この<ruby><rb>絵</rb><rt>え</rt></ruby>はその<ruby><rb>情景</rb><rt>じょう けい</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>十分</rb><rt>じゅう ぶん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>描</rb><rt>えが</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>切</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>っているとは<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>えない。</span>／<span class="translation">I can’t say that this picture fully depicts the scene. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>絶対</rb><rt>ぜっ たい</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>自分</rb><rt>じ ぶん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>正</rb><rt>ただ</rt></ruby>しいと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>切</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>った。</span>／<span class="translation">She insisted that she was absolutely correct.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses doing something sufficiently or strongly.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x14664"><span class="number">3. </span>R-きる〈severance〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>きな<ruby><rb>布</rb><rt>ぬの</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>二</rb><rt>ふた</rt></ruby>つに<ruby><rb>断</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>ち<ruby><rb>切</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>った。</span>／<span class="translation">I cut a big cloth into two pieces.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>別</rb><rt>わか</rt></ruby>れてからも<ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>のことを<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>切</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>ることができない。</span>／<span class="translation">I can’t stop thinking about her even since we broke up.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>故郷</rb><rt>こ きょう</rt></ruby>にとどまりたいという<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>いを<ruby><rb>断</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>ち<ruby><rb>切</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>って<ruby><rb>出発</rb><rt>しゅっ ぱつ</rt></ruby>した。</span>／<span class="translation">I gave up my intentions to remain in my hometown and set out.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “cutting.” Derived meanings include “discarding” and “giving up.”</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x14695"><span class="number">4. </span>R-きれない</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>それはいくら<ruby><rb>悔</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>やんでも<ruby><rb>悔</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>やみきれないことだった。</span>／<span class="translation">I can’t get over my regret.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>その<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>との<ruby><rb>別</rb><rt>わか</rt></ruby>れは、あきらめきれないつらい<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>として、<ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>でも<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>胸</rb><rt>むね</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>奥底</rb><rt>おく そこ</rt></ruby>にある。</span>／<span class="translation">The memory of being unable to accept our breakup still pains me deep in my heart.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses the notion that one “can’t do something completely” or “can’t do something enough.”</div></body></html>