<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>せいぜい</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0309.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【せい】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0311.xhtml">【せずに】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x24268">【せいぜい】</h1><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>結婚</rb><rt>けっ こん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>記念日</rb><rt>き ねん び</rt></ruby>といっても、せいぜい<ruby><rb>夕食</rb><rt>ゆう しょく</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>外</rb><rt>そと</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べに<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>くくらいで、たいしたことはしません。</span>／<span class="translation">All we do for our wedding anniversary is go out for dinner—we don’t do anything fancy.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>忙</rb><rt>いそが</rt></ruby>しい<ruby><rb>会社</rb><rt>かい しゃ</rt></ruby>で、<ruby><rb>年末</rb><rt>ねん まつ</rt></ruby>でもせいぜい<ruby><rb>三日</rb><rt>みっ か</rt></ruby>くらいしか<ruby><rb>休</rb><rt>やす</rt></ruby>めません。</span>／<span class="translation">It’s a busy company, so even at the end of the year I can only take about three days off.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>景気</rb><rt>けい き</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>どうなのか<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>りません。<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>にわかることといえばせいぜい<ruby><rb>貯金</rb><rt>ちょ きん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>金利</rb><rt>きん り</rt></ruby>ぐらいです。</span>／<span class="translation">I don’t know what the economic situation is now. All I know is the interest rates for savings accounts.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>ふるさとと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>われて<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>だ</rt></ruby>すことといえばせいぜい<ruby><rb>秋祭</rb><rt>あき まつ</rt></ruby>りくらいですね。</span>／<span class="translation">All I remember when someone asks about my hometown is the autumn festival.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>給料</rb><rt>きゅう りょう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>安</rb><rt>やす</rt></ruby>くて、<ruby><rb>一人</rb><rt>ひとり</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>暮</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>らすのがせいぜいだ。</span>／<span class="translation">My salary is so low that it’s all I can do just to support myself.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span>たいしたおもてなしも<ruby><rb>出来</rb><rt>で き</rt></ruby>ませんが、せいぜい<ruby><rb>楽</rb><rt>たの</rt></ruby>しんでください。</span>／<span class="translation">I’m not much of a host, but I hope you’ll enjoy yourself as much as you can.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（7）</span>あまり<ruby><rb>期待</rb><rt>き たい</rt></ruby>していないけどせいぜい<ruby><rb>頑張</rb><rt>がん ば</rt></ruby>って<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>い、とコーチに<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>われて<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>た<ruby><rb>試合</rb><rt>し あい</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>勝</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>ってしまった。</span>／<span class="translation">My coach had told me to do my best, even though he wasn’t expecting much, and then I won the match.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “do what you can, within certain limits.” Often used in the pattern せいぜい...くらい. As in (5) above, the pattern ...が、せいぜいだ may also be used. In (6) and (7), it is used idiomatically to mean “as much as possible.”</div></body></html>