<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ふう</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0908.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ひとり...のみならず】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0910.xhtml">【ふしがある】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x84134">【ふう】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x84136"><span class="number">1. </span>Nふう</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>あの<ruby><rb>寺</rb><rt>てら</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>中国風</rb><rt>ちゅう ごく ふう</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">That temple is Chinese in style.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>音楽家</rb><rt>おん がく か</rt></ruby>だというので、ちょっと<ruby><rb>変</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>わった<ruby><rb>人間</rb><rt>にん げん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>想像</rb><rt>そう ぞう</rt></ruby>していたが、やってきたのはサラリーマン<ruby><rb>風</rb><rt>ふう</rt></ruby>のごく<ruby><rb>普通</rb><rt>ふ つう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>男</rb><rt>おとこ</rt></ruby>だった。</span>／<span class="translation">As I had heard that he was a musician, I had imagined him to be an unusual person. But the man who showed up was a very ordinary, businessman-type person.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>美智子</rb><rt>み ち こ</rt></ruby>さんは、<ruby><rb>今風</rb><rt>いま ふう</rt></ruby>のしゃれた<ruby><rb>装</rb><rt>よそお</rt></ruby>いでパーティーに<ruby><rb>現</rb><rt>あらわ</rt></ruby>れた。</span>／<span class="translation">Michiko-san turned up at a party in a trendy, fashionable outfit.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “in a certain style or fashion” or the appearance of something/someone is “like” something. Takes the form  NふうのN when modifiying a noun.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x84170"><span class="number">2. </span>...ふう〈appearance〉</h2><h4 class="info">［Na なふう］</h4><h4 class="info">［A-いふう］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-ている／V-た　ふう］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>そんなに<ruby><rb>嫌</rb><rt>いや</rt></ruby>がっているふうでもなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">He didn’t look as though he was objecting to it so much.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>男</rb><rt>おとこ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>何気</rb><rt>なに げ</rt></ruby>ないふうを<ruby><rb>装</rb><rt>よそお</rt></ruby>って<ruby><rb>近</rb><rt>ちか</rt></ruby>づいて<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>た。</span>／<span class="translation">The man came near us with an unassuming air.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>久</rb><rt>ひさ</rt></ruby>しぶりに<ruby><rb>会</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>った<ruby><rb>松井</rb><rt>まつ い</rt></ruby>さんは、ずいぶんやつれて、<ruby><rb>生活</rb><rt>せい かつ</rt></ruby>にも<ruby><rb>困</rb><rt>こま</rt></ruby>っているふうだった。</span>／<span class="translation">When I met Matsui-san after a long time, she looked exhausted and as if she was having difficulty in making ends meet.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>なんにも<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>らないくせに<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>ったふうなことを<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>うな。</span>／<span class="translation">Don’t talk as though you understand when you don’t know anything!</span></div><div class="explanation">Indicates the way or state in which someone appears to others.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x84216"><span class="number">3. </span>...ふう〈way, manner〉</h2><h3 class="subsubtitle" id="idsubsubtitlex1x84219"><span class="number">a. </span>こういうふう</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>こういうふうにやってごらん。</span>／<span class="translation">Try doing it like this.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>あの<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>も、ああいうふうに<ruby><rb>遊</rb><rt>あそ</rt></ruby>んでばっかりいると、ろくなことにはならないよ。</span>／<span class="translation">That guy, too, won’t amount to anything if he just keeps spending his time idly like that.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>どういうふうに<ruby><rb>説明</rb><rt>せつ めい</rt></ruby>していいのかわからない。</span>／<span class="translation">I don’t know how to explain this.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><span class="number">A:</span>きみ、<ruby><rb>最近</rb><rt>さい きん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>太</rb><rt>ふと</rt></ruby>りすぎじゃない？</span>／<span class="translation">Haven’t you been putting on too much weight these days?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span><ruby><rb>失礼</rb><rt>しつ れい</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>奴</rb><rt>やつ</rt></ruby>だな。そういうふうに、<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>嫌</rb><rt>いや</rt></ruby>がることをはっきり<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>うもんじゃないよ。</span>／<span class="translation">How rude of you! You shouldn’t go around like that pointing out things that offend people!</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>そういうふうな<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>かた</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>失礼</rb><rt>しつ れい</rt></ruby>だよ。</span>／<span class="translation">It sounds rude to say things in such a manner.</span></div><div class="explanation">Similarly, そういう, ああいう, どういう may also be used to indicate specific ways or methods. Conjugate in the same way as <i>na</i>-adjectives.  The variations are こんなふう, そんなふう, あんなふう, どんなふう.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x84277"><span class="number">b. </span>...というふうに</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>好</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>きな<ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>会社</rb><rt>かい しゃ</rt></ruby>へ<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>き、<ruby><rb>好</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>きな<ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>帰</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>るというふうにはいかないものだろうか。</span>／<span class="translation">I guess I can’t do things like choose when to go to work and when to return home.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>ひとり<ruby><rb>帰</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>り、またひとり<ruby><rb>帰</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>りというふうにして、だんだん<ruby><rb>客</rb><rt>きゃく</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>少</rb><rt>すく</rt></ruby>なくなってきた。</span>／<span class="translation">Leaving one by one, the audience gradually grew smaller.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>今月</rb><rt>こん げつ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>京都</rb><rt>きょう と</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>来月</rb><rt>らい げつ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>奈良</rb><rt>な ら</rt></ruby>というふうに、<ruby><rb>毎月</rb><rt>まい つき</rt></ruby>どこか<ruby><rb>近</rb><rt>ちか</rt></ruby>くに<ruby><rb>旅行</rb><rt>りょ こう</rt></ruby>することにした。</span>／<span class="translation">We have decided to take a trip to a nearby place each month, such as Kyoto this month and Nara the next.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to describe how to do something, or the method or the state of something, by giving examples.</div></body></html>