<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>てしょうがない</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0464.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【でしょう】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0466.xhtml">【てたまらない】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x42023">【てしょうがない】</h1><h4 class="info">［A-くてしようがない］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-てしょうがない］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>赤</rb><rt>あか</rt></ruby>ちゃんが<ruby><rb>朝</rb><rt>あさ</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>泣</rb><rt>な</rt></ruby>いてしょうがない。</span>／<span class="translation">The baby has been crying his eyes out since morning.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>このところ、<ruby><rb>疲</rb><rt>つか</rt></ruby>れがたまっているのか、<ruby><rb>眠</rb><rt>ねむ</rt></ruby>くてしょうがない。</span>／<span class="translation">It might be just tiredness, but I have been so sleepy these days.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>バレーボールを<ruby><rb>始</rb><rt>はじ</rt></ruby>めたら、<ruby><rb>毎日</rb><rt>まい にち</rt></ruby>おなかがすいてしょうがない。</span>／<span class="translation">I have been famished every day since starting volleyball.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>可愛</rb><rt>かわ</rt></ruby>いがっていた<ruby><rb>猫</rb><rt>ねこ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>死</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>んで、<ruby><rb>悲</rb><rt>かな</rt></ruby>しくてしょうがない。</span>／<span class="translation">I have been beside myself with grief since my beloved pet cat died.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>二度</rb><rt>に ど</rt></ruby>も、<ruby><rb>自転車</rb><rt>じ てん しゃ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>盗</rb><rt>ぬす</rt></ruby>まれた。<ruby><rb>腹</rb><rt>はら</rt></ruby>がたってしょうがない。</span>／<span class="translation">I’ve had my bicycle stolen twice. I am really seeing red!</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span>うちの<ruby><rb>子</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>先生</rb><rt>せん せい</rt></ruby>にほめられたのがうれしくてしょうがない<ruby><rb>様子</rb><rt>よう す</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">Our child seems absolutely ecstatic after being commended by her teacher.  </span></div><div class="explanation">This is a casual, spoken-language form of ...てしかたがない, as well as a reduced form of ...てしようがない.</div><h4 class="reference">→<a href="part0461.xhtml#idtitlex1x41710">【てしかたがない】</a></h4></body></html>