<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>だといい</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0389.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【だと】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0391.xhtml">【だといって】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x31789">【だといい】</h1><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><span class="number">A:</span>みんな<ruby><rb>今頃</rb><rt>いま ごろ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>安全</rb><rt>あん ぜん</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>場所</rb><rt>ば しょ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>避難</rb><rt>ひ なん</rt></ruby>していますよ。</span>／<span class="translation">By now, everyone should have evacuated to a safe place.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>だといいが。<ruby><rb>心配</rb><rt>しん ぱい</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">I hope so. But I’m worried.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>慎重</rb><rt>しん ちょう</rt></ruby>だから、<ruby><rb>危</rb><rt>あぶ</rt></ruby>ない<ruby><rb>運転</rb><rt>うん てん</rt></ruby>はしませんよ。</span>／<span class="translation">He’s cautious, so he won’t drive dangerously.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>だといいけど。<ruby><rb>本当</rb><rt>ほん  とう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>大丈夫</rb><rt>だい じょう ぶ</rt></ruby>かしら。</span>／<span class="translation">I hope not. I wonder if he’ll really be all right.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>子供達</rb><rt>こ ども たち</rt></ruby>もきっとこのプレゼントに<ruby><rb>大喜</rb><rt>おお よろこ</rt></ruby>びしますよ。</span>／<span class="translation">I’m sure the kids, too, will be very happy with this gift.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>だといいね。</span>／<span class="translation">I certainly hope so.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used at the beginning of a sentence in conversation. Means the same as そうだといい. Followed by が, けれど, or けど and expresses the meaning “I hope that is the situation.” それだといいが and そうだといいけど are also used.</div></body></html>