<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>とは</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0612.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【との】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0614.xhtml">【とはいいながら】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x58228">【とは】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x58233"><span class="number">1. </span>...とは〈definition〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>パソコンとは、<ruby><rb>個人</rb><rt>こ じん</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>使</rb><rt>つか</rt></ruby>える<ruby><rb>小型</rb><rt>こ がた</rt></ruby>のコンピューターのことだ。</span>／<span class="translation">A <i>pasokon</i> (personal computer) is a small-sized computer for individual use.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>蓮華</rb><rt>れん げ</rt></ruby>とは<ruby><rb>蓮</rb><rt>はす</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>花</rb><rt>はな</rt></ruby>のことだ。</span>／<span class="translation">A <i>renge</i> (Chinese milk vetch) is a lotus flower.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>21<ruby><rb>世紀</rb><rt>せい き</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>日本</rb><rt>に ほん</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>求</rb><rt>もと</rt></ruby>められる<ruby><rb>福祉</rb><rt>ふく し</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>形態</rb><rt>けいたい</rt></ruby>とはどのようなものだろうか。</span>／<span class="translation">What will be the form of social welfare system required by Japanese society in the 21st century?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>「<ruby><rb>普遍的</rb><rt>ふ へん てき</rt></ruby>」とは、どんな<ruby><rb>場合</rb><rt>ば あい</rt></ruby>にも<ruby><rb>広</rb><rt>ひろ</rt></ruby>く<ruby><rb>一般的</rb><rt>いっ ぱん てき</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>当</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>てはまるという<ruby><rb>意味</rb><rt>い み</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">“Universal” means that something applies broadly and generally, in all cases.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>にとって<ruby><rb>家族</rb><rt>か ぞく</rt></ruby>とは<ruby><rb>一体</rb><rt>いっ たい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>なのだろうか。</span>／<span class="translation">What exactly does “family” mean to me?</span></div><div class="explanation">とは is used after a noun to describe the meaning, characteristics, or content of the noun. In the patternとは...ものだ, it is used to express the essential features of the noun, and in the patterns ...とは...のことだ／意味だ and ...とは...ということだ／意味だ, it is used to define the meaning or content of a word or phrase. Used mainly in written language. In spoken Japanese, Nというのは is more common.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x58285"><span class="number">2. </span>...とは〈quotation〉</h2><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>森山</rb><rt>もり やま</rt></ruby>さん、<ruby><rb>会社</rb><rt>かい しゃ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>退職</rb><rt>たい しょく</rt></ruby>するそうですよ。</span>／<span class="translation">I’ve heard that Moriyama-san’s leaving the company, you know.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>えっ、<ruby><rb>退職</rb><rt>たい しょく</rt></ruby>するとは、<ruby><rb>結婚</rb><rt>けっ こん</rt></ruby>するということですか。</span>／<span class="translation">Oh, does that mean she’s getting married?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>《<ruby><rb>書</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>置</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>きを<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>て》「お<ruby><rb>世話</rb><rt>せ わ</rt></ruby>になりました」とは、もう<ruby><rb>帰</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>ってこないということだろうか。</span>／<span class="translation">《looking at a note》“Thank you for all you’ve done for me...” I wonder if this means she won’t be coming back.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><span class="number">A:</span>このお<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はなし</rt></ruby>、なかったことにしてください。</span>／<span class="translation">Let’s just say this didn’t happen.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>「なかったことにする」とはどう<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>うことですか？</span>／<span class="translation">What do you mean, “This didn’t happen”?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>親</rb><rt>おや</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>向</rb><rt>む</rt></ruby>かって「バカヤロー」とは<ruby><rb>何事</rb><rt>なに ごと</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">What makes you think you can call your parents “stupid idiots”?</span></div><div class="explanation">Used in response to a verbal utterance, written information, or some other linguistic input, to indicate the speaker’s evaluation of the utterance/information or to confirm its real intention. Often accompanied by feelings such as surprise, amazement, or anger. というのは is often used instead of とは. However, とは cannot be replaced by というのは in fixed expressions such as とは何事だ (see (4) above).</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x58349"><span class="number">3. </span>...とは〈surprise〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>一人</rb><rt>ひとり</rt></ruby>で5<ruby><rb>種目</rb><rt>しゅ もく</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>優勝</rb><rt>ゆう しょう</rt></ruby>とはまったく<ruby><rb>驚</rb><rt>おどろ</rt></ruby>いた。</span>／<span class="translation">It is absolutely amazing that you won five different events on your own.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>全員</rb><rt>ぜん いん</rt></ruby>そろって<ruby><rb>授業</rb><rt>じゅ ぎょう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>サボる</rb><rt>さぼる</rt></ruby>とはあきれた<ruby><rb>学生達</rb><rt>がく せい たち</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">What an appalling group of students, all of them cutting class together!</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>を2<ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>待</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>たせておいて「すみません」の<ruby><rb>一言</rb><rt>ひと こと</rt></ruby>もないとはまったく<ruby><rb>非常識</rb><rt>ひ じょう しき</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>奴</rb><rt>やつ</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">Someone who keeps you waiting for two hours and then doesn’t offer a word of apology is an absolute boor. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>タクシーの<ruby><rb>中</rb><rt>なか</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>忘</rb><rt>わす</rt></ruby>れた<ruby><rb>現金</rb><rt>げん きん</rt></ruby>がもどってくるとは<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>いもよらないことでした。</span>／<span class="translation">I never expected that the cash I had left in the taxi would be returned to me!</span></div><div class="explanation">とは expresses the speaker’s surprise and amazement when <span class="noSeparate">s/he</span> encounters an unexpected situation. In casual speech, なんて is often used instead of とは. As shown below, the clause following とは (or なんて) may be omitted.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>あの人がこんな嘘をつくとは。／(What a surprise that) <span class="noSeparate">s/he</span> would tell such a lie! </div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>ベテラン登山家の彼が遭難するとは。／To think that an experienced climber like him should go missing in the mountains!</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>こともあろうに、結婚式の日がこんなひどい土砂降りになろうとは。／(I never imagined there would be) a downpour like this on my wedding day, of all days! </div></body></html>