<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>にくらべて</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0770.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【にくい】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0772.xhtml">【にくらべると】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x70964">【にくらべて】</h1><h4 class="info">［Nにくらべて］</h4><h4 class="info">［Vのにくらべて］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>例年</rb><rt>れい ねん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>比</rb><rt>くら</rt></ruby>べて<ruby><rb>今年</rb><rt>ことし</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>野菜</rb><rt>や さい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>出来</rb><rt>で き</rt></ruby>がいい。</span>／<span class="translation">The vegetables this year are better compared with those in years past. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>男性</rb><rt>だん せい</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>比</rb><rt>くら</rt></ruby>べて<ruby><rb>女性</rb><rt>じょ せい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>ほう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>柔軟性</rb><rt>じゅう なん せい</rt></ruby>があると<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>われる。</span>／<span class="translation">It is said that women have more flexibility than men.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>パソコンを<ruby><rb>使</rb><rt>つか</rt></ruby>うと、<ruby><rb>手</rb><rt>て</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>書</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>くのに<ruby><rb>比</rb><rt>くら</rt></ruby>べて<ruby><rb>字</rb><rt>じ</rt></ruby>もきれいだし<ruby><rb>早</rb><rt>はや</rt></ruby>い。</span>／<span class="translation">When you use a personal computer, the print is neater and more quickly written compared with that written by hand.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>だい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>都市間</rb><rt>と し かん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>移動</rb><rt>い どう</rt></ruby>するのに<ruby><rb>比</rb><rt>くら</rt></ruby>べて、<ruby><rb>田舎</rb><rt>いなか</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>町</rb><rt>まち</rt></ruby>へ<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>くのは<ruby><rb>何倍</rb><rt>なん ばい</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby>がかかる。</span>／<span class="translation">Traveling to a town in the countryside takes us several times longer than traveling between big cities. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>東京</rb><rt>とう きょう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>比</rb><rt>くら</rt></ruby>べると<ruby><rb>大阪</rb><rt>おお さか</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>ほう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>物価</rb><rt>ぶっ か</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>安</rb><rt>やす</rt></ruby>い。</span>／<span class="translation">Compared with Tokyo, the cost of living in Osaka is less expensive.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span>ジョギングに<ruby><rb>比</rb><rt>くら</rt></ruby>べると、<ruby><rb>水泳</rb><rt>すい えい</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>全身</rb><rt>ぜん しん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>運動</rb><rt>うん どう</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>身体</rb><rt>からだ</rt></ruby>にもいいということだ。</span>／<span class="translation">I hear that compared with jogging, swimming makes you use the entire body and is good for your health.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used in the pattern of XにくらべてY or XにくらべるとY to discuss Y in comparison with X. May be rephrased as XよりY.</div></body></html>