<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>わけではない</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part1054.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【わけだ】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part1056.xhtml">【わけても】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x106895">【わけではない】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x106897"><span class="number">1. </span>...わけではない</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>このレストランはいつも<ruby><rb>客</rb><rt>きゃく</rt></ruby>がいっぱいだが、だからといって<ruby><rb>特別</rb><rt>とく べつ</rt></ruby>においしいわけではない。</span>／<span class="translation">This restaurant is always full of customers but that fact doesn’t necessarily mean that the food is particularly good.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>はふだんあんまり<ruby><rb>料理</rb><rt>りょう り</rt></ruby>をしないが、<ruby><rb>料理</rb><rt>りょう り</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>嫌</rb><rt>きら</rt></ruby>いなわけではない。<ruby><rb>忙</rb><rt>いそが</rt></ruby>しくてやる<ruby><rb>暇</rb><rt>ひま</rt></ruby>がないだけなのだ。</span>／<span class="translation">The reason I don’t often cook is not that I dislike it. It’s just that I’m busy and don’t have the time to do it.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>部屋</rb><rt>へ や</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>本</rb><rt>ほん</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>埋</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>まっているが、<ruby><rb>全部</rb><rt>ぜん ぶ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>読</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>んだわけではなく、<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>ってはみたものの<ruby><rb>開</rb><rt>ひら</rt></ruby>いたことさえないというものも<ruby><rb>多</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>い。</span>／<span class="translation">My room is full of books but that doesn’t mean I have read them all. There are many which I haven’t even opened since I bought them.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>来月</rb><rt>らい げつ</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>英会話</rb><rt>えい かい わ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>習</rb><rt>なら</rt></ruby>うことにした。<ruby><rb>全然</rb><rt>ぜん ぜん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はな</rt></ruby>せないわけではないのだが、<ruby><rb>日頃</rb><rt>ひ ごろ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>英語</rb><rt>えい ご</rt></ruby>をしゃべる<ruby><rb>機会</rb><rt>き かい</rt></ruby>がないので、いざというとき<ruby><rb>口</rb><rt>くち</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>てこないのだ。</span>／<span class="translation">I’ve decided to learn English conversation from next month. It’s not that I can’t speak it at all but, as I don’t have a regular chance to speak English, when it comes to the crunch it won’t come out of my mouth. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>娘</rb><rt>むすめ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>外泊</rb><rt>がい はく</rt></ruby>をただ<ruby><rb>黙</rb><rt>だま</rt></ruby>って<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>のがしているわけではないが、<ruby><rb>下手</rb><rt>へ た</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>注意</rb><rt>ちゅう い</rt></ruby>したらかえって<ruby><rb>反発</rb><rt>はん ぱつ</rt></ruby>するので、どうしたものかと<ruby><rb>考</rb><rt>かんが</rt></ruby>えあぐねている。</span>／<span class="translation">I don’t just silently overlook my daughter staying out overnight but clumsily caution her and, as she responds by rebelling all the more, I am at a loss as to what is to be done.  </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>弁解</rb><rt>べん かい</rt></ruby>をするわけではありませんが、<ruby><rb>昨日</rb><rt>きのう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>会議</rb><rt>かい ぎ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>長引</rb><rt>なが び</rt></ruby>いてどうしても<ruby><rb>抜</rb><rt>ぬ</rt></ruby>けられなかったのです。</span>／<span class="translation">It’s no excuse but yesterday’s meeting dragged on and I couldn’t escape no matter what.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（7）</span><span class="number">A:</span>イギリスへ<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ってしまうんだそうですね。</span>／<span class="translation">I hear that you’re going to the UK.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>ええ。でも<ruby><rb>別</rb><rt>べつ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>永住</rb><rt>えい じゅう</rt></ruby>するわけじゃありませんし、5<ruby><rb>年</rb><rt>ねん</rt></ruby>たったらまた<ruby><rb>帰</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>ってきますよ。</span>／<span class="translation">Yes, but it’s not permanent; I’ll be back when five years have passed.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（8）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>今度</rb><rt>こん ど</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>日曜日</rb><rt>にち よう び</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>映画</rb><rt>えい が</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>きませんか。</span>／<span class="translation">Shall we go to see a movie next Sunday?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span><ruby><rb>日曜</rb><rt>にち よう</rt></ruby>ですか。</span>／<span class="translation">Sunday?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>予定</rb><rt>よ てい</rt></ruby>があるんですか。</span>／<span class="translation">Do you have plans?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>いえ、<ruby><rb>予定</rb><rt>よ てい</rt></ruby>があるわけではないのですが、その<ruby><rb>日</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby>はうちでゆっくりしたかったので...。</span>／<span class="translation">No, it’s not that I have plans but I wanted to spend that day relaxing at home....</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to deny that which is thought to be naturally derived from what has just been said or from the current situation. It is often used together with phrases such as だからといって, 別に and 特に.</div><div class="explanation">In example (1), it can generally be concluded from いつも客がいっぱいだ that “the food is delicious” but this is denied as not being the case. Meaning “It is a mistake to conclude that the food is delicious,” おいしいわけではない, in comparison to the directly negative 料理はおいしくない, becomes a euphemistic, indirectly negative expression. Therefore, as in (8), it can be used to make a more indirect refusal than 予定はありませんが. そういうわけではないのですが can also be said. Furthermore, as in (3) and (4), when used with words such as 全部・みんな and 全然・まったく, it becomes a partial denial, meaning for example, “I have read a few” or “I can speak it a little.”</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x107011"><span class="number">2. </span>というわけではない</h2><h3 class="subsubtitle" id="idparagraphx1x107014"><span class="number"></span>ってわけではない</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>このレストランはいつも<ruby><rb>満員</rb><rt>まん いん</rt></ruby>だが、だからといって<ruby><rb>特</rb><rt>とく</rt></ruby>においしいというわけではない。</span>／<span class="translation">This restaurant is always full but, be that as it may, it doesn’t mean the food is especially delicious.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>はふだんあまり<ruby><rb>料理</rb><rt>りょう り</rt></ruby>をしないが、<ruby><rb>料理</rb><rt>りょう り</rt></ruby>がきらい（だ）というわけではない。<ruby><rb>忙</rb><rt>いそが</rt></ruby>しくてやる<ruby><rb>暇</rb><rt>ひま</rt></ruby>がないだけだ。</span>／<span class="translation">I don’t cook very often but it doesn’t mean I hate cooking. It’s just that I’m busy and don’t have the time to do it.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><span class="number">A:</span>あした<ruby><rb>映画</rb><rt>えい が</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>かない？</span>／<span class="translation">Coming to the movies tomorrow?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>あした、か。うーん。</span>／<span class="translation">Tomorrow? I’m not sure....</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>とじゃいやだってこと？</span>／<span class="translation">You don’t want to go with me?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>いや、いや（だ）ってわけじゃないんだけど…。</span>／<span class="translation">No, no, that’s not it....</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>今日</rb><rt>きょう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>学校</rb><rt>がっ こう</rt></ruby>へ<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>く<ruby><rb>気</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>がしない。<ruby><rb>雨</rb><rt>あめ</rt></ruby>だから<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>きたくないというわけではない。ただ<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>となく<ruby><rb>今日</rb><rt>きょう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なに</rt></ruby>もする<ruby><rb>気</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>になれないのだ。</span>／<span class="translation">I don’t feel like going to school today. It’s not because it’s raining. It’s just that, for some reason, I don’t feel like doing anything today.</span></div><div class="explanation">This form connects わけではない with という／って. As in the 雨だから行きたくない of example (4), in cases where the logic XだからY appears explicitly within the same sentence, it is usual to use というわけではない rather than わけではない.</div></body></html>