<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ばこそ</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0886.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ばかりでなく...も】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0888.xhtml">【はじめ】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x82414">【ばこそ】</h1><h4 class="info">［N／Na　であればこそ］</h4><h4 class="info">［A-ければこそ］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-ばこそ］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>すぐれた<ruby><rb>教師</rb><rt>きょう し</rt></ruby>であればこそ、<ruby><rb>学生</rb><rt>がく せい</rt></ruby>からあれほど<ruby><rb>慕</rb><rt>した</rt></ruby>われるのです。</span>／<span class="translation">It is because she is such an excellent teacher that she is so adored by her students.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>体</rb><rt>からだ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>健康</rb><rt>けん こう</rt></ruby>であればこそ、つらい<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>もやれるのだ。</span>／<span class="translation">It is only because you are healthy that you can do the hard work, too. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>問題</rb><rt>もん だい</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>対</rb><rt>たい</rt></ruby>する<ruby><rb>関心</rb><rt>かん しん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>深</rb><rt>ふか</rt></ruby>ければこそ、こんなに<ruby><rb>長</rb><rt>なが</rt></ruby>く<ruby><rb>研究</rb><rt>けん きゅう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>続</rb><rt>つづ</rt></ruby>けてこられたのだ。</span>／<span class="translation">It is because you are deeply interested in this problem that you have been able to continue your research for such a long time. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>あなたを<ruby><rb>信頼</rb><rt>しん らい</rt></ruby>していればこそ、お<ruby><rb>願</rb><rt>ねが</rt></ruby>いするのですよ。</span>／<span class="translation">It is because I trust you that I am asking you. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>家族</rb><rt>か ぞく</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>愛</rb><rt>あい</rt></ruby>すればこそ、<ruby><rb>自分</rb><rt>じ ぶん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>犠牲</rb><rt>ぎ せい</rt></ruby>になることなどはおそれない。</span>／<span class="translation">It’s precisely because I love my family that I’m not afraid of sacrificing myself. </span></div><div class="explanation">Formed by attaching こそ to ば. A slightly old-fashioned expression used to emphasize the reason for something. Means “for this very reason.” Often followed by のだ at the end of the sentence. In most cases, から (because) can be used instead. However, with から the emphasis on the reason is lost.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>すぐれた教師だから、学生からあれほど慕われるのです。／She is an excellent teacher, so she is really adored by her students.</div><div class="explanation">からこそ is similar to ばこそ. However, からこそ can be used with a cause or reason that has either positive or negative meaning, whereas ばこそ is unlikely to be used in the case of a negative cause/reason.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>体が弱ければこそ嫌いなものも無理して食べなければならない。／It is because you are weak that you should force yourself to eat things you don’t like. </div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>体が弱いからこそ嫌いなものも無理して食べなければならない。／It is because you are weak that you should force yourself to eat things you don’t like. </div><div class="explanation">Has the tone of written language. Used in written texts and formal spoken language. </div><h4 class="reference">→<a href="part0157.xhtml#idtitlex1x13186">【からこそ】</a></h4></body></html>