<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>からいう</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0154.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【からいい】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0156.xhtml">【からいったら】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x13072">【からいう】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x13074"><span class="number">1. </span>Nからいうと</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>立場</rb><rt>たち ば</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>うと、それはこまります。</span>／<span class="translation">Personally, I have a problem with that.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>先生</rb><rt>せん せい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>見方</rb><rt>み かた</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>うと、<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>のやりかたはまちがっているのかもしれませんが、<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>はこれがいいんです。</span>／<span class="translation">From the teacher’s point of view, my way is incorrect, but I think this is how to do it.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>あなたの<ruby><rb>考</rb><rt>かんが</rt></ruby>え<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>かた</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>うと、<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>主張</rb><rt>しゅ ちょう</rt></ruby>していることなんかは<ruby><rb>急進的</rb><rt>きゅう しん てき</rt></ruby>すぎるということになるんでしょうね。</span>／<span class="translation">According to your line of thinking, my claims might seem too radical.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>民主主義</rb><rt>みん しゅ しゅ ぎ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>原則</rb><rt>げん そく</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>えば、あのやり<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>かた</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>手続</rb><rt>て つづ</rt></ruby>きの<ruby><rb>点</rb><rt>てん</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>問題</rb><rt>もん だい</rt></ruby>がある。</span>／<span class="translation">According to democratic principles, there are procedural problems with doing it that way.</span></div><div class="explanation">Takes the forms Nからいうと／からいえば／からいったら and means “judging from a particular point of view.” Has the same meaning as からみると. Unlike からみると, however, Nからいうと and its variations cannot be attached directly to a noun that refers to a person. </div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>彼から言うと、それはまちがっているそうだ。／From him, it’s incorrect.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>彼の考え方から言うと、それはまちがっているそうだ。／From his point of view, it’s incorrect.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>彼から見ると、それはまちがっているそうだ。／As he sees it, it’s incorrect.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x13138"><span class="number">2. </span>Nからいって</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>さっきの<ruby><rb>返事</rb><rt>へん じ</rt></ruby>のしかたから<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>って、<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>はあの<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>にきらわれているようだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Judging from the way he just answered, he really seems to dislike me.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>あの<ruby><rb>態度</rb><rt>たい ど</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>って、<ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>引</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>下</rb><rt>さ</rt></ruby>がる<ruby><rb>気</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>はまったくないようだ。</span>／<span class="translation">From her attitude, she doesn’t intend to back down at all.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>あの<ruby><rb>口</rb><rt>くち</rt></ruby>ぶりから<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>って、<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>はもうその<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はなし</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>っているようだな。</span>／<span class="translation">Judging from the way he talks, he seems to know about it already.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>あの<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>性格</rb><rt>せい かく</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>って、そんなことで<ruby><rb>納得</rb><rt>なっ とく</rt></ruby>するはずがないよ。</span>／<span class="translation">Judging from her character, she’d never go along with that.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses the basis for a judgment. からして and からみて are also used.</div></body></html>