<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>といったらありゃしない</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0536.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【といったらありはしない】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0538.xhtml">【といったらない】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x50478">【といったらありゃしない】</h1><h4 class="info">［Nといったらありゃしない］</h4><h4 class="info">［A-いといったらありゃしない］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>あの<ruby><rb>子</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>自分</rb><rt>じ ぶん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>周</rb><rt>まわ</rt></ruby>りからちやほやされているのを<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>った<ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>うえ</rt></ruby>で、それを<ruby><rb>利用</rb><rt>り よう</rt></ruby>しているんだよ。<ruby><rb>憎</rb><rt>にく</rt></ruby>たらしいといったらありゃしない。</span>／<span class="translation">That girl knows she gets a lot of attention from everyone around her, and she uses it. What a horrid child she is!</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>このごろあちこちで<ruby><rb>地震</rb><rt>じ しん</rt></ruby>があるでしょ？　おそろしいったらありゃしない。</span>／<span class="translation">Recently there are earthquakes all over the place, aren’t there? It’s too scary for words.</span></div><div class="explanation">A casual form of といったらありはしない that is used in spoken language. Often reduced to ...ったらありゃしない. </div></body></html>