<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>めぐって</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0972.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【めく】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0974.xhtml">【めったに】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x94510">【めぐって】</h1><h4 class="info">［Nをめぐって］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>憲法</rb><rt>けん ぽう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>改正</rb><rt>かい せい</rt></ruby>をめぐって<ruby><rb>国会</rb><rt>こっ かい</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>激</rb><rt>はげ</rt></ruby>しい<ruby><rb>論議</rb><rt>ろん ぎ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>闘</rb><rt>たたか</rt></ruby>わされている。</span>／<span class="translation">Fierce debates are being fought in the Diet surrounding the revision of the constitution.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>自殺</rb><rt>じ さつ</rt></ruby>をめぐって<ruby><rb>様々</rb><rt>さま ざま</rt></ruby>なうわさや<ruby><rb>憶測</rb><rt>おく そく</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>乱</rb><rt>みだ</rt></ruby>れとんだ。</span>／<span class="translation">There are various rumors and speculation surrounding his suicide.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>人事</rb><rt>じん じ</rt></ruby>をめぐって、<ruby><rb>社内</rb><rt>しゃ ない</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>険悪</rb><rt>けん あく</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>雰囲気</rb><rt>ふん い き</rt></ruby>となった。</span>／<span class="translation">An ugly atmosphere has developed within the company concerning personnel.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “relating to...” or “concerning....” Used to include the peripheral circumstances of a thing and to take them as the subject. Unlike ...について, there are many verbs with which it cannot be used.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>日本の経済をめぐって研究しています。／I am researching the Japanese economy.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>日本の経済について研究しています。／I am researching the Japanese economy.</div><div class="explanation">Only verbs such as 議論する (to argue), 議論を闘わす (to have a heated debate), うわさが流れる (to be rumored) and 紛糾する (to become complicated) can be used with めぐる, and the nouns must be something that various people can argue about or discuss. をめぐり is often used in writing. When it is used to modify a noun, the form becomes NをめぐるN or NをめぐってのN.   </div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>政治献金をめぐる疑惑がマスコミに大きくとりあげられている。／Suspicions surrounding political donations have been widely reported by the mass media.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>父親の遺産をめぐっての争いは、日増しにひどくなっていった。／The quarrels over their father’s inheritance were getting worse by the day.</div></body></html>