<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>とか1</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0560.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【とおり】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0562.xhtml">【とか<sub class="variation">2</sub>】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x52914">【とか<sub class="variation">1</sub>】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x52917"><span class="number">1. </span>Nとか（Nとか）</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>病気</rb><rt>びょう き</rt></ruby>のお<ruby><rb>見舞</rb><rt>み ま</rt></ruby>いには<ruby><rb>果物</rb><rt>くだ もの</rt></ruby>とかお<ruby><rb>花</rb><rt>はな</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>好</rb><rt>この</rt></ruby>まれる。</span>／<span class="translation">When you visit someone in the hospital, it’s good to take something like fruit or flowers.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>はケーキとか<ruby><rb>和菓子</rb><rt>わ が し</rt></ruby>とかの<ruby><rb>甘</rb><rt>あま</rt></ruby>いものはあまり<ruby><rb>好</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>きではありません。</span>／<span class="translation">I don't really like sweet things, like cake or Japanese-style confectioneries. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>最近</rb><rt>さい きん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>大学院</rb><rt>だい がく いん</rt></ruby>では、<ruby><rb>一度</rb><rt>いち ど</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>就職</rb><rt>しゅう しょく</rt></ruby>した<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>とか、<ruby><rb>子育</rb><rt>こ そだ</rt></ruby>てを<ruby><rb>終</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>わった<ruby><rb>主婦</rb><rt>しゅ ふ</rt></ruby>とかが、<ruby><rb>再</rb><rt>ふたた</rt></ruby>び<ruby><rb>勉強</rb><rt>べん きょう</rt></ruby>するために<ruby><rb>入学</rb><rt>にゅう がく</rt></ruby>するケースが<ruby><rb>目立</rb><rt>め だ</rt></ruby>つようになった。</span>／<span class="translation">Graduate schools are recently seeing a marked increase in students who are returning to pursue further studies, including people with job experience and homemakers who have finished raising their children. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>日本</rb><rt>に ほん</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>外国</rb><rt>がい こく</rt></ruby>へのお<ruby><rb>土産</rb><rt>みやげ</rt></ruby>としては、カメラとか<ruby><rb>電気</rb><rt>でん き</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>製品</rb><rt>せい ひん</rt></ruby>がいいでしょう。</span>／<span class="translation">For gifts to take from Japan to other countries, a camera or an electric appliance of some kind might be a good idea. </span></div><div class="explanation">Attaches to nouns referring to people or things and is used to give several similar examples. Has the tone of spoken language.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x52954"><span class="number">2. </span>V-るとか（V-るとか）</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>休日</rb><rt>きゅう じつ</rt></ruby>はテレビを<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>るとか、<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>物</rb><rt>もの</rt></ruby>するとかして<ruby><rb>過</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>ごすことが<ruby><rb>多</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>い。</span>／<span class="translation">I usually spend my days off doing things like watching TV or going shopping. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>教師</rb><rt>きょう し</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>不足</rb><rt>ふ そく</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>教師</rb><rt>きょう し</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>教</rb><rt>おし</rt></ruby>える<ruby><rb>時間数</rb><rt>じ かん すう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>増</rb><rt>ふ</rt></ruby>やすとか、<ruby><rb>一</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>つの<ruby><rb>教室</rb><rt>きょう しつ</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>複式</rb><rt>ふく しき</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>授業</rb><rt>じゅ ぎょう</rt></ruby>をするとかの<ruby><rb>方法</rb><rt>ほう ほう</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>とか<ruby><rb>乗</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>り<ruby><rb>切</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>ることにしたい。</span>／<span class="translation">I want to find a way to cope with the teacher shortage, such as increasing teaching hours or conducting combined classes in the same classroom. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>奨学金</rb><rt>しょう がく きん</rt></ruby>をもらっていない<ruby><rb>留学生</rb><rt>りゅう がく せい</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>授業料</rb><rt>じゅ ぎょう りょう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>免除</rb><rt>めん じょ</rt></ruby>するとか、<ruby><rb>部屋代</rb><rt>へ や だい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>安</rb><rt>やす</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>宿舎</rb><rt>しゅく しゃ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>提供</rb><rt>てい きょう</rt></ruby>するとかして、<ruby><rb>経済面</rb><rt>けい ざい めん</rt></ruby>での<ruby><rb>援助</rb><rt>えん じょ</rt></ruby>をする<ruby><rb>必要</rb><rt>ひつ よう</rt></ruby>がある。</span>／<span class="translation">We need to provide financial support to international students who don’t have scholarships, by waiving their tuition fees, or offering them inexpensive housing, or other things like that. </span></div><div class="explanation">Used after action verbs to give several examples of similar actions or activities. </div></body></html>