<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ことこのうえない</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0213.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ことができる】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0215.xhtml">【ごとし】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x17249">【ことこのうえない】</h1><h4 class="info">［Na なことこのうえない］</h4><h4 class="info">［A-いことこのうえない］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>丁重</rb><rt>てい ちょう</rt></ruby>なことこの<ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>うえ</rt></ruby>ないごあいさつをいただき、<ruby><rb>恐縮</rb><rt>きょう しゅく</rt></ruby>しております。</span>／<span class="translation">We are truly overwhelmed at the warmth of the greeting you have given us.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>その<ruby><rb>風景</rb><rt>ふう けい</rt></ruby>は、さびしいことこのうえ（も）ないものであった。</span>／<span class="translation">The landscape was lonely beyond description.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>有権者</rb><rt>ゆう けん しゃ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>存在</rb><rt>そん ざい</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>無視</rb><rt>む し</rt></ruby>したような、その<ruby><rb>政治家</rb><rt>せい じ か</rt></ruby>たちの<ruby><rb>舞台裏</rb><rt>ぶ たい うら</rt></ruby>での<ruby><rb>争</rb><rt>あらそ</rt></ruby>いは、<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>ぐるしいことこの<ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>うえ</rt></ruby>ないものであった。</span>／<span class="translation">The infighting among those politicians behind the scenes—as if they were totally indifferent to the voting public—was disgraceful beyond description. </span></div><div class="explanation">Means “there is nothing more than such-and-such.” A formal expression used in written language. The examples above can be paraphrased, respectively, as このうえなく丁重なあいさつ (the most cordial of greetings), このうえなくさびしい (the loneliest possible), and このうえなく見ぐるしいもの (unspeakably disgraceful). </div></body></html>