<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>どんなに</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0643.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【どんな】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0645.xhtml">【ないか】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x59793">【どんなに】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x59795"><span class="number">1. </span>どんなに...だろう（か）</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>希望校</rb><rt>き ぼう こう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>合格</rb><rt>ごう かく</rt></ruby>できたらどんなにいいだろうか。</span>／<span class="translation">How great it would be if I could pass the entrance exam for the school of my choice.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>息子</rb><rt>むすこ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>戦死</rb><rt>せん し</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>ったら<ruby><rb>両親</rb><rt>りょう しん</rt></ruby>はどんなに<ruby><rb>悲</rb><rt>かな</rt></ruby>しむことでしょう。</span>／<span class="translation">How sad his parents would be if they knew that their son had died in the war.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>父</rb><rt>ちち</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>生</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>きていたらどんなに<ruby><rb>喜</rb><rt>よろこ</rt></ruby>んでくれたことだろうか。</span>／<span class="translation">How pleased my father would have been for me if he were alive!</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>無事</rb><rt>ぶ じ</rt></ruby>だと<ruby><rb>分</rb><rt>わ</rt></ruby>かった<ruby><rb>時</rb><rt>とき</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>はどんなにうれしかっただろう。</span>／<span class="translation">How delighted I was when I found out that my child was safe.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>はこの<ruby><rb>日</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby>がくることをどんなに<ruby><rb>望</rb><rt>のぞ</rt></ruby>んだことだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">How eagerly I had waited for this day!</span></div><div class="explanation">The pattern どんなに...だろう(か) combines with expressions of joy, sorrow, hope, and so on to create exclamatory statements indicating that the degree of emotion is far greater than what is usual. In (1)-(3), this pattern is used to make a conjecture about something that hasn’t actually happened and conveys the meaning of “if X were so, then surely (I) would be/would have been extremely Y.” On the other hand, in (4) and (5) it expresses that someone actually was very happy or did eagerly look forward to something.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x59838"><span class="number">2. </span>どんなに...ても</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>どんなに<ruby><rb>金持</rb><rt>かね も</rt></ruby>ちでも<ruby><rb>愛情</rb><rt>あい じょう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>恵</rb><rt>めぐ</rt></ruby>まれなければ<ruby><rb>幸福</rb><rt>こう ふく</rt></ruby>とは<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>えない。</span>／<span class="translation">No matter how rich you are, you cannot claim to be happy without being loved.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>たとえどんなに<ruby><rb>苦</rb><rt>くる</rt></ruby>しくても<ruby><rb>最後</rb><rt>さい ご</rt></ruby>まで<ruby><rb>頑張</rb><rt>がん ば</rt></ruby>ります。</span>／<span class="translation">No matter how hard it will be, I’ll make every effort to see this through to the end.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>どんなに<ruby><rb>働</rb><rt>はたら</rt></ruby>いても<ruby><rb>暮</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>らしはちっとも<ruby><rb>楽</rb><rt>らく</rt></ruby>にならない。</span>／<span class="translation">No matter how hard I work, it doesn’t get any easier to make ends meet.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means that, regardless of the degree or level of the condition indicated by this clause, what is stated in the subsequent clause is always true (or, in the case of a negative form, not true). どんなに...ても can be immediately preceded by たとえ (if; even if) and replaced by いかに／いくら...ても (however/no matter how (much)).</div></body></html>