<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ばかりか</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0884.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ばかり】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0886.xhtml">【ばかりでなく...も】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x82229">【ばかりか】</h1><div class="explanation">A formal expression with the tone of written language. </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x82241"><span class="number">1. </span>...ばかりか　...も／...まで</h2><h4 class="info">［Nばかりか　...も／...まで］</h4><h4 class="info">［Na なばかりか　...も／...まで］</h4><h4 class="info">［A／V　ばかりか　...も／...まで］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>現代語</rb><rt>げん だい ご</rt></ruby>ばかりか<ruby><rb>古典</rb><rt>こ てん</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>読</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>める。</span>／<span class="translation">She can read not only modern works but also the classics. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>会社</rb><rt>かい しゃ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>同僚</rb><rt>どう りょう</rt></ruby>ばかりか<ruby><rb>家族</rb><rt>か ぞく</rt></ruby>までが<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>馬鹿</rb><rt>ば か</rt></ruby>にしている。</span>／<span class="translation">Not only my colleagues at work but also my family treat me like a fool. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>そのニュースが<ruby><rb>放送</rb><rt>ほう そう</rt></ruby>されると、<ruby><rb>日本</rb><rt>に ほん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>国内</rb><rt>こく ない</rt></ruby>ばかりか<ruby><rb>遠</rb><rt>とお</rt></ruby>く<ruby><rb>海外</rb><rt>かい がい</rt></ruby>からも<ruby><rb>激励</rb><rt>げき れい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>手紙</rb><rt>て がみ</rt></ruby>がよせられた。</span>／<span class="translation">When the news was broadcast, letters of encouragement were sent to them not only from within Japan but also from abroad.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>手術</rb><rt>しゅ じゅつ</rt></ruby>をしても<ruby><rb>歩</rb><rt>ある</rt></ruby>けるようにはならないかもしれないと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>われていたが、<ruby><rb>手術後</rb><rt>しゅ じゅつ ご</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>回復</rb><rt>かい ふく</rt></ruby>はめざましく、<ruby><rb>歩</rb><rt>ある</rt></ruby>けるようになったばかりか<ruby><rb>軽</rb><rt>かる</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>運動</rb><rt>うん どう</rt></ruby>もこなせるようになった。</span>／<span class="translation">Although he was told that he might not be able to walk even after surgery, his recovery has been remarkable; not only has he started to be able to walk, he can even do some light exercise. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>最近</rb><rt>さい きん</rt></ruby>では、<ruby><rb>東京</rb><rt>とう きょう</rt></ruby>や<ruby><rb>大阪</rb><rt>おお さか</rt></ruby>のような<ruby><rb>大都市</rb><rt>だい と し</rt></ruby>ばかりか、<ruby><rb>中</rb><rt>ちゅう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>小都市</rb><rt>しょう と し</rt></ruby>でも<ruby><rb>道路</rb><rt>どう ろ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>渋滞</rb><rt>じゅう たい</rt></ruby>がひどくなってきているらしい。</span>／<span class="translation">Recently, traffic congestion seems to be getting much worse, not only in big cities such as Tokyo and Osaka, but even in small and medium-sized cities.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “not only...but also....” Used to make a statement about something of a lesser degree and then indicate that this also extends to something else at a higher degree.</div><div class="explanation">For example, (1) means “she can read not only modern works but also the classics, which are much more difficult.” (2) means “not only my colleagues, but even my family (who should have the most faith in me) are treating me like a fool.”</div><div class="explanation">When this expression is used in the form V-ないばかりか, it tends to be used to refer to something unfavorable. </div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>彼は自分の失敗を認めないばかりか、相手が悪いなどと言い出す始末だ。／He not only ignores his own mistakes, he tops things off by saying that the other party is to blame.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>親切に忠告してやったのに、彼は、まじめに聞かないばかりかしまいには怒りだした。／Even though I gave him a piece of advice out of kindness, he not only refused to listen seriously, he also ended up getting angry.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>薬を飲んだが、全然きかないばかりか、かえって気分が悪くなってきた。／Although I took some medicine, it didn’t work for me at all; instead, it made me feel sick. </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x82337"><span class="number">2. </span>そればかりか</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>上田</rb><rt>うえ だ</rt></ruby>さんは<ruby><rb>英語</rb><rt>えい ご</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はな</rt></ruby>せる。そればかりか<ruby><rb>韓国語</rb><rt>かん こく ご</rt></ruby>もインドネシア<ruby><rb>語</rb><rt>ご</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はな</rt></ruby>せる。</span>／<span class="translation">Ueda-san can speak English. In addition, he can also speak Korean and Indonesian.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>はその<ruby><rb>男</rb><rt>おとこ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>着</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>る<ruby><rb>物</rb><rt>もの</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>与</rb><rt>あた</rt></ruby>えた。そればかりか、いくらかの<ruby><rb>金</rb><rt>かね</rt></ruby>まで<ruby><rb>持</rb><rt>も</rt></ruby>たせてやった。</span>／<span class="translation">He gave some clothes to the man. What is more, he also let him have some money.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>日本</rb><rt>に ほん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>私立</rb><rt>し りつ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>高校</rb><rt>こう こう</rt></ruby>には、たいてい<ruby><rb>制服</rb><rt>せい ふく</rt></ruby>がある。そればかりか<ruby><rb>靴</rb><rt>くつ</rt></ruby>やカバンまで<ruby><rb>決</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>まっているという<ruby><rb>学校</rb><rt>がっ こう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>多</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>い。</span>／<span class="translation">Students at private high schools in Japan usually wear a school uniform. Moreover, many schools even have designated shoes and school bags. </span></div><div class="explanation">Used the same way as Usage 1 (above). The first sentence describes something of a relatively lower degree, and the second one indicates that this extends to another thing at a higher degree.</div></body></html>