<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ではあるまいか</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0477.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ではあるが】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0479.xhtml">【てはいけない】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x43162">【ではあるまいか】</h1><h4 class="info">［N／Na 　（なの）ではあるまいか］</h4><h4 class="info">［A／V　のではあるまいか］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>この<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はなし</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>全</rb><rt>まった</rt></ruby>くの<ruby><rb>作</rb><rt>つく</rt></ruby>り<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>ばなし</rt></ruby>なのではあるまいか。</span>／<span class="translation">Isn’t this story nothing more than pure fiction?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>この<ruby><rb>品質</rb><rt>ひん しつ</rt></ruby>で、こんな<ruby><rb>値段</rb><rt>ね だん</rt></ruby>をつけるとは、あまりにも<ruby><rb>非常識</rb><rt>ひ じょう しき</rt></ruby>ではあるまいか。</span>／<span class="translation">Don’t you think it makes no sense to put such a price on something of this quality?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>いまどき、<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>のような<ruby><rb>学生</rb><rt>がく せい</rt></ruby>はめずらしいのではあるまいか。</span>／<span class="translation">Wouldn’t you say that a student like him is quite remarkable nowadays?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>父</rb><rt>ちち</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>自分</rb><rt>じ ぶん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>癌</rb><rt>がん</rt></ruby>だということに<ruby><rb>気</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>づいていたのではあるまいか。</span>／<span class="translation">Isn’t it most likely that my father realized on his own that he had cancer?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>らは<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>のことを<ruby><rb>疑</rb><rt>うたが</rt></ruby>っているのではあるまいか。</span>／<span class="translation">Doesn’t it seem like they have doubts about me?</span></div><div class="explanation">A more formal way to say ではないだろうか, with the feel of written language. Used in formal writing, such as academic papers or scholarly articles.</div><h4 class="reference">→<a href="part0486.xhtml#idtitlex1x44168">【ではないだろうか】</a></h4></body></html>