<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>しまつだ</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0272.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【しはする】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0274.xhtml">【じゃあ】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x21438">【しまつだ】</h1><h4 class="info">［V-るしまつだ］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>夫</rb><rt>おっと</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>欠点</rb><rt>けっ てん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>延々</rb><rt>えん えん</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>並</rb><rt>なら</rt></ruby>べ<ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>げ、あげくの<ruby><rb>果</rb><rt>は</rt></ruby>てには<ruby><rb>離婚</rb><rt>り こん</rt></ruby>すると<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>って<ruby><rb>泣</rb><rt>な</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>だ</rt></ruby>す<ruby><rb>始末</rb><rt>し まつ</rt></ruby>だった。</span>／<span class="translation">She went on and on listing her husband’s shortcomings, and in the end she finally said she was going to divorce him and burst into tears.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>息子</rb><rt>むすこ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>大学</rb><rt>だい がく</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>勉強</rb><rt>べん きょう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>役</rb><rt>やく</rt></ruby>にも<ruby><rb>立</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>たないと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ってアルバイトに<ruby><rb>精</rb><rt>せい</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>だ</rt></ruby>し、この<ruby><rb>頃</rb><rt>ごろ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>中退</rb><rt>ちゅう たい</rt></ruby>して<ruby><rb>働</rb><rt>はたら</rt></ruby>きたいなどと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>だ</rt></ruby>す<ruby><rb>始末</rb><rt>し まつ</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">Saying that college studies serve no purpose whatsoever, my son has put all his energy into his part-time job, and now he says he wants to drop out and get a job. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>一度</rb><rt>いち ど</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>相談</rb><rt>そう だん</rt></ruby>にのってあげただけなのに、<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>はあなただけが<ruby><rb>頼</rb><rt>たよ</rt></ruby>りだと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>って、<ruby><rb>真夜中</rb><rt>ま よ なか</rt></ruby>にでも<ruby><rb>電話</rb><rt>でん わ</rt></ruby>をかけてくる<ruby><rb>始末</rb><rt>し まつ</rt></ruby>だった。</span>／<span class="translation">I only listened to his troubles once, but now he ends up calling me in the middle of the night and telling me I’m the only one he can depend on. </span></div><div class="explanation">Attached to the dictionary form of a verb, しまつだ expresses that a troublesome situation or annoyance has arisen due to another person’s actions. The first half of the sentence describes all the things that have led up to the situation, and the second half states the situation that has arisen as a result.</div><div class="explanation">The expression この始末だ in the example below is idiomatic and implies criticism when indicating something that has occurred. </div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>山田はどうもこの頃学校に来ないと思ったらこの始末だ。バイクで人身事故を起こすような学生には、もう退学してもらうしかない。／I’ve been wondering why Yamada hasn’t come to school lately, and now this! A student like that who causes a fatal accident with his motorcycle—the only thing we can do is have him quit school. </div></body></html>