<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>からみる</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0166.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【からみたら】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0168.xhtml">【がり】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x13561">【からみる】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x13563"><span class="number">1. </span>Nからみると</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>イスラム<ruby><rb>教</rb><rt>きょう</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>ると、それはおかしな<ruby><rb>考</rb><rt>かんが</rt></ruby>え<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>かた</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">From an Islamic point of view, it is a strange way of thinking.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>先生</rb><rt>せん せい</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>ると、<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>のやりかたはまちがっているのかもしれませんが、<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>はこれがいいんです。</span>／<span class="translation">From the teacher’s point of view, my way of doing things might be incorrect, but for me it is right.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>立場</rb><rt>たち ば</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>ると、その<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>とおしは<ruby><rb>楽観的</rb><rt>らっ かん てき</rt></ruby>すぎると<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>わざるをえません。</span>／<span class="translation">From my point of view, I can’t help saying that the forecast is too optimistic.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>あなたのような<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>ると、<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>主張</rb><rt>しゅ ちょう</rt></ruby>していることなんかは<ruby><rb>急進的</rb><rt>きゅう しん てき</rt></ruby>すぎるということになるんでしょうね。</span>／<span class="translation">From the stance of someone like you, what I am insisting on would probably be seen as too radical.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>たちから<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>ると、おとなはいったい<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なに</rt></ruby>をやっているんだ、ということになるんだろうね。</span>／<span class="translation">The children are probably wondering what in the world the grown-ups are doing.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used in the forms Nからみると／みれば／みたら and expresses judging something from a certain point of view. Has the same meaning as からというと, but can be directly attached to nouns expressing people, which makes it different from からというと.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x13606"><span class="number">2. </span>Nからみて</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>あの<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>かた</rt></ruby>からみて、<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>はあの<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>にきらわれているようだ。</span>／<span class="translation">From the way he spoke, he really seems to dislike me.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>あの<ruby><rb>態度</rb><rt>たい ど</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>て、<ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>引</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>下</rb><rt>さ</rt></ruby>がる<ruby><rb>気</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>はまったくないようだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Considering her attitude, she doesn’t seem to have any intention of withdrawing.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>あの<ruby><rb>口</rb><rt>くち</rt></ruby>ぶりから<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>て、<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>はもうその<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はなし</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>っているようだな。</span>／<span class="translation">Judging from the way he talks, he already seems to know what was said.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>あの<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>性格</rb><rt>せい かく</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>て、そんなことで<ruby><rb>納得</rb><rt>なっ とく</rt></ruby>するはずがない。</span>／<span class="translation">Judging from her character, there’s no way she could be persuaded.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses the basis for making a judgment.</div></body></html>