<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>をよぎなくされる</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part1082.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【をよぎなくさせる】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part1084.xhtml">【んじゃ】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x108302">【をよぎなくされる】</h1><h4 class="info">［Nをよぎなくされる］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>火事</rb><rt>か じ</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>住</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>まいが<ruby><rb>焼</rb><rt>や</rt></ruby>けたため、<ruby><rb>家探</rb><rt>いえ さが</rt></ruby>しを<ruby><rb>余儀</rb><rt>よ ぎ</rt></ruby>なくされた。</span>／<span class="translation">I was forced into house-hunting as my home was damaged by a fire.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>長時間</rb><rt>ちょう じ かん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>交渉</rb><rt>こう しょう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>結果</rb><rt>けっ か</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>妥協</rb><rt>だ きょう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>余儀</rb><rt>よ ぎ</rt></ruby>なくされた。</span>／<span class="translation">We were forced to compromise as a result of long negotiations.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>事業</rb><rt>じ ぎょう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>拡張</rb><rt>かく ちょう</rt></ruby>したが、<ruby><rb>売</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>り<ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>げ<ruby><rb>不振</rb><rt>ふ しん</rt></ruby>のため、<ruby><rb>撤退</rb><rt>てっ たい</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>余儀</rb><rt>よ ぎ</rt></ruby>なくされる<ruby><rb>結果</rb><rt>けっ か</rt></ruby>になった。</span>／<span class="translation">Although we had expanded the company, due to a slump in profits, we were forced to withdraw (from the market).</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>これ<ruby><rb>以上</rb><rt>い じょう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>争</rb><rt>あらそ</rt></ruby>いをさけるために<ruby><rb>全員</rb><rt>ぜん いん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>協力</rb><rt>きょう りょく</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>余儀</rb><rt>よ ぎ</rt></ruby>なくされた。</span>／<span class="translation">In order to avoid further dispute, all members were forced to cooperate.  </span></div><div class="explanation">Attaches to nouns which demonstrate an act, and means “reluctantly” or “the situation is such that one has no choice but to....” It is a written expression.</div></body></html>