<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ものだ</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0999.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ものがある】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part1001.xhtml">【ものだから】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x98982">【ものだ】</h1><h4 class="info">［Na なものだ］</h4><h4 class="info">［A-いものだ］</h4><h4 class="info">［Vものだ］</h4><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x98993"><span class="number">1. </span>...ものだ〈true nature〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>心</rb><rt>こころ</rt></ruby>は、なかなかわからないものだ。</span>／<span class="translation">The human heart is not easily understood.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>人間</rb><rt>にん げん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>本来</rb><rt>ほん らい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>自分勝手</rb><rt>じ ぶん かっ て</rt></ruby>なものです。</span>／<span class="translation">People are essentially selfish.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>赤</rb><rt>あか</rt></ruby>ん<ruby><rb>坊</rb><rt>ぼう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>泣</rb><rt>な</rt></ruby>くものだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Babies are meant to cry.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>金</rb><rt>かね</rt></ruby>というのはすぐなくなるものだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Money is a thing which soon disappears.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>水</rb><rt>みず</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>本来</rb><rt>ほん らい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>低</rb><rt>ひく</rt></ruby>きに<ruby><rb>流</rb><rt>なが</rt></ruby>れるものです。</span>／<span class="translation">Water naturally flows downhill.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>世間</rb><rt>せ けん</rt></ruby>とは<ruby><rb>冷</rb><rt>つめ</rt></ruby>たいものだ。<ruby><rb>一</rb><rt>いち</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>時</rb><rt>じ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>騒</rb><rt>さわ</rt></ruby>いでもすぐに<ruby><rb>忘</rb><rt>わす</rt></ruby>れる。</span>／<span class="translation">It’s a cold world. Even big disturbances are soon forgotten.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（7）</span><ruby><rb>人生</rb><rt>じん せい</rt></ruby>なんて、はかないものだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Life is a transient thing.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（8）</span><span class="number">A:</span>すみません、レポートを<ruby><rb>書</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>くのを<ruby><rb>忘</rb><rt>わす</rt></ruby>れました。</span>／<span class="translation">I’m sorry, I forgot to write the report.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span><ruby><rb>学生</rb><rt>がく せい</rt></ruby>というのは<ruby><rb>本来</rb><rt>ほん らい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>勤勉</rb><rt>きん べん</rt></ruby>なものだ。アルバイトばかりしていてはいけないよ。</span>／<span class="translation">A student should essentially be diligent. Just doing your part-time job is not enough!</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to express the truth/generally accepted thinking/essential qualities of a thing, with strong emotion. It is often used with the phrase 本来. As well as expressing the general nature of a thing, it can also be used as an admonition. For example, (8) states the attitude a student should have. </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x99069"><span class="number">2. </span>...ものだ〈strong feeling〉</h2><h3 class="subsubtitle" id="idsubsubtitlex1x99072"><span class="number">a. </span>...ものだ</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>「スマホがないと<ruby><rb>生活</rb><rt>せい かつ</rt></ruby>できない」とは、<ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>学生</rb><rt>がく せい</rt></ruby>はぜいたくなことを<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>うものだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Today’s students say extravagant things like “I cannot live without a mobile phone.”</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>この<ruby><rb>校舎</rb><rt>こう しゃ</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>古</rb><rt>ふる</rt></ruby>くなったものだ。</span>／<span class="translation">This school building has gotten old now.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>この<ruby><rb>町</rb><rt>まち</rt></ruby>も、<ruby><rb>昔</rb><rt>むかし</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>違</rb><rt>ちが</rt></ruby>ってきれいになったものだ。</span>／<span class="translation">This town has gotten cleaner than in days gone by.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>昔</rb><rt>むかし</rt></ruby>のことを<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>うと、いい<ruby><rb>世</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>中</rb><rt>なか</rt></ruby>になったものだと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>う。</span>／<span class="translation">Looking back at the past, I think that times have gotten better.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>あたりを<ruby><rb>見回</rb><rt>み まわ</rt></ruby>して、かれはつくづく<ruby><rb>遠</rb><rt>とお</rt></ruby>くへ<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>たものだと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>った。</span>／<span class="translation">Looking around the area, he thought about what a very long way he had come.</span></div><div class="explanation">This expresses strong feelings or admiration.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x99115"><span class="number">b. </span>よく（も）...ものだ</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>あんなに<ruby><rb>負債</rb><rt>ふ さい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>きかった<ruby><rb>会社</rb><rt>かい しゃ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>再建</rb><rt>さい けん</rt></ruby>がよくできたものだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Restructuring a company that had such large debts was a thing well done.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>こんなむずかしい<ruby><rb>問題</rb><rt>もん だい</rt></ruby>が、よく<ruby><rb>解</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>けたものだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Solving such a difficult problem is really something.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>昔</rb><rt>むかし</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>世話</rb><rt>せ わ</rt></ruby>になっていた<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>に、よくもあんな<ruby><rb>失礼</rb><rt>しつ れい</rt></ruby>なことができたものだ。</span>／<span class="translation">How dare you do such a rude thing to someone to whom you are indebted!</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>完成</rb><rt>かん せい</rt></ruby>した<ruby><rb>作品</rb><rt>さく ひん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>ると、みんなよく<ruby><rb>頑張</rb><rt>がん ば</rt></ruby>ったものだと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>う。</span>／<span class="translation">Looking at the completed work, I think everyone tried really hard.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>こんな<ruby><rb>小</rb><rt>ちい</rt></ruby>さい<ruby><rb>記事</rb><rt>き じ</rt></ruby>がよく<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>つけられたものだ。</span>／<span class="translation">You did well to find such a small article.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span>あんなに<ruby><rb>不況</rb><rt>ふ きょう</rt></ruby>のときによく<ruby><rb>就職</rb><rt>しゅう しょく</rt></ruby>できたものだと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>う。</span>／<span class="translation">I think you did really well to find a job in such a time of recession.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses a feeling of admiration or amazement at a certain event or action. Often appears unnatural if used without よく(も).</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x99164"><span class="number">3. </span>V-たいものだ</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>そのお<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はなし</rt></ruby>はぜひうかがいたいものです。</span>／<span class="translation">I would very much like to hear that story.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>それはぜひ<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>たいものだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Of course I would want to see that.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>海外</rb><rt>かい がい</rt></ruby>へ<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>かれるときには、わたしも<ruby><rb>一度</rb><rt>いち ど</rt></ruby>、ご<ruby><rb>一緒</rb><rt>いっ しょ</rt></ruby>したいものです。</span>／<span class="translation">How wonderful it would be if I could have an opportunity to come along with you when you go on a trip abroad.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>好運</rb><rt>こう うん</rt></ruby>にあやかりたいものだ。</span>／<span class="translation">I wish I could share in his good fortune.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>のわたしを、<ruby><rb>死</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>んだ<ruby><rb>両親</rb><rt>りょう しん</rt></ruby>にみてもらいたいものだ。</span>／<span class="translation">I wish my late parents could see me now.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span>このまま<ruby><rb>平和</rb><rt>へい わ</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>生活</rb><rt>せい かつ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>続</rb><rt>つづ</rt></ruby>いてほしいものだ。</span>／<span class="translation">I want this peaceful life to continue as it is.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used with expressions of desire such as たい and ほしい, emphasizes the feeling or emotion of the expression.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x99213"><span class="number">4. </span>V-たものだ</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>学生</rb><rt>がく せい</rt></ruby>のころはよく<ruby><rb>貧乏</rb><rt>びん ぼう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>旅行</rb><rt>りょ こう</rt></ruby>をしたものでした。</span>／<span class="translation">I traveled around a lot on a shoestring budget when I was a student.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>若</rb><rt>わか</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>頃</rb><rt>ころ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>周</rb><rt>まわ</rt></ruby>りの<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>とよくけんかをしたものだが、<ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>はすっかりおだやかになった。</span>／<span class="translation">When he was young he often quarreled with the people around him, but now he has completely mellowed. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>小</rb><rt>ちい</rt></ruby>さい<ruby><rb>頃</rb><rt>ころ</rt></ruby>はよくみんなで<ruby><rb>近</rb><rt>ちか</rt></ruby>くの<ruby><rb>森</rb><rt>もり</rt></ruby>へ<ruby><rb>遊</rb><rt>あそ</rt></ruby>びに<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ったものでした。</span>／<span class="translation">When we were small, we would often all go to play in the nearby forest. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>そのころは<ruby><rb>週末</rb><rt>しゅう まつ</rt></ruby>になると<ruby><rb>映画館</rb><rt>えい が かん</rt></ruby>にいりびたったものでした。</span>／<span class="translation">At that time, when the weekend came around, we would often hang out at the movie theater.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>小学校</rb><rt>しょう がっ こう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>時代</rb><rt>じ だい</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>のいたずらには、<ruby><rb>先生</rb><rt>せん せい</rt></ruby>たちが<ruby><rb>手</rb><rt>て</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>焼</rb><rt>や</rt></ruby>いたものでした。</span>／<span class="translation">When he was in elementary school, the teachers had difficulty dealing with his pranks.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to reflect with strong emotion on things which occurred on a habitual basis in the past.</div></body></html>