<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>さて</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0251.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【さっぱり】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0253.xhtml">【さほど】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x19852">【さて】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x19854"><span class="number">1. </span>さて</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>さて、そろそろいこうか。</span>／<span class="translation">All right, shall we get going?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>さて、つぎはどこへいこうかな。</span>／<span class="translation">So, I wonder where we should go next. </span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><span class="number">A:</span>あの<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>、だれ？</span>／<span class="translation">That person (there), who is she? </span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>さて、だれだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">Well, I’m not sure. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>さて、<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はなし</rt></ruby>はかわりますが...。</span>／<span class="translation">Well, not to change the topic, but....</span></div><div class="explanation">さて is a word that people use when they want to move on to the next topic or action. Used to invite someone to do something, as in (1), to let the listener know that you are thinking, as in (2) and (3), or to change the topic, as in (4). A slightly formal expression.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x19903"><span class="number">2. </span>さてV-てみると</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>漢字</rb><rt>かん じ</rt></ruby>がおもしろそうだったので<ruby><rb>日本語</rb><rt>に ほん ご</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>勉強</rb><rt>べん きょう</rt></ruby>することにしたのだが、さてはじめてみると、これがけっこうむずかしい。</span>／<span class="translation">I decided to study Japanese because <i>k</i><i>anji </i>looked interesting, but after I got started, I found out that it’s pretty difficult. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>頂上</rb><rt>ちょう じょう</rt></ruby>までいけば<ruby><rb>水</rb><rt>みず</rt></ruby>ぐらいあるだろうと、むりをしてのぼっていった。ところが、さてついてみると<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なに</rt></ruby>もないのである。</span>／<span class="translation">I pushed myself to climb to the top of the mountain, thinking that at least there would be some water there. However, when I got to the top there was nothing. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>頂上</rb><rt>ちょう じょう</rt></ruby>までいけば<ruby><rb>水</rb><rt>みず</rt></ruby>ぐらいあるだろうと、むりをしてのぼっていった。さてついてみると、あった、あった、そこには<ruby><rb>神社</rb><rt>じん じゃ</rt></ruby>もあり<ruby><rb>水</rb><rt>みず</rt></ruby>もあった。</span>／<span class="translation">I pushed myself to climb to the top of the mountain, thinking that at least there would be some water there. And when I got to the top, yes, yes, there was a shrine and also some water. </span></div><div class="explanation">さてV-てみると is followed by an expression that indicates a result, and it means that an action based on some kind of expectation has led to a certain outcome. Tends to be used when the result is unexpected, as in (1) and (2), rather than when the result was expected, as in (3). A slightly formal expression.</div></body></html>