<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>んで</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part1092.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【んだろう】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part1094.xhtml">【んです】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x108881">【んで】</h1><h4 class="info">［N／Na　なんで］</h4><h4 class="info">［A／V　んで］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>かぜなんで<ruby><rb>今日</rb><rt>きょう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>休</rb><rt>やす</rt></ruby>みます。</span>／<span class="translation">I have a cold so will take today off.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>雨</rb><rt>あめ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>降</rb><rt>ふ</rt></ruby>りそうなんで<ruby><rb>洗濯</rb><rt>せん たく</rt></ruby>はやめときます。</span>／<span class="translation">It looks like rain so I won’t do the laundry.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>あんまりおいしかったんで、ぜんぶ<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べてしまった。</span>／<span class="translation">That was too good and so I ate it all.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>残</rb><rt>のこ</rt></ruby>った<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>はあした<ruby><rb>必</rb><rt>かなら</rt></ruby>ずかたづけるんで、<ruby><rb>今日</rb><rt>きょう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>勘弁</rb><rt>かん べん</rt></ruby>してください。</span>／<span class="translation">I’ll finish the rest of the work without fail tomorrow. Please excuse me today.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>急</rb><rt>いそ</rt></ruby>いで<ruby><rb>作</rb><rt>つく</rt></ruby>ったんで、おいしくないかもしれませんよ。</span>／<span class="translation">I made them in a hurry and so they’re probably not very tasty. </span></div><div class="explanation">A casual expression for ので. Sounds quite abrupt, and therefore cannot be used  with superiors.</div><h4 class="reference">→<a href="part0862.xhtml#idtitlex1x77214">【ので】</a></h4></body></html>