<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>にくわえて</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0773.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【にくわえ】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0775.xhtml">【にこしたことはない】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x71058">【にくわえて】</h1><h4 class="info">［Nにくわえて］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>激</rb><rt>はげ</rt></ruby>しい<ruby><rb>風</rb><rt>かぜ</rt></ruby>にくわえて、<ruby><rb>雨</rb><rt>あめ</rt></ruby>もひどくなってきた。</span>／<span class="translation">In addition to strong winds, it started to rain more heavily. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>学生</rb><rt>がく せい</rt></ruby>たちは<ruby><rb>毎日</rb><rt>まい にち</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>宿題</rb><rt>しゅく だい</rt></ruby>にくわえて<ruby><rb>毎週</rb><rt>まい しゅう</rt></ruby>レポートを<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>だ</rt></ruby>さなければならなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">In addition to their daily assignments, the students had to submit a paper every week. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>ふたりは、<ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>誕生</rb><rt>たん じょう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>加</rb><rt>くわ</rt></ruby>えて、<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>順調</rb><rt>じゅん ちょう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>進</rb><rt>すす</rt></ruby>み、<ruby><rb>幸</rb><rt>しあわ</rt></ruby>せで<ruby><rb>一杯</rb><rt>いっ ぱい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>毎日</rb><rt>まい にち</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>送</rb><rt>おく</rt></ruby>っている。</span>／<span class="translation">In addition to the birth of a baby, their jobs are going smoothly, so the couple’s days are filled with happiness. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>その<ruby><rb>地場</rb><rt>じば</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>産業</rb><rt>さん ぎょう</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>国内</rb><rt>こく ない</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>需要</rb><rt>じゅよう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>低迷</rb><rt>てい めい</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>加</rb><rt>くわ</rt></ruby>えて<ruby><rb>安価</rb><rt>あん か</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>外国</rb><rt>がい こく</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>製品</rb><rt>せい ひん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>流入</rb><rt>りゅう にゅう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>押</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>されて、<ruby><rb>苦</rb><rt>くる</rt></ruby>しい<ruby><rb>状態</rb><rt>じょう たい</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>続</rb><rt>つづ</rt></ruby>いている。</span>／<span class="translation">Besides suffering from the decreased domestic demand, the local industry has been faced with difficulties because of the inflow of inexpensive foreign products.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses the meaning that some thing/state/event is not completed by itself but is complemented by another thing/state/event. A slightly formal, written expression.</div></body></html>