<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>おもえば</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0101.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【おもう】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0103.xhtml">【おもったら】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x9030">【おもえば】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x9032"><span class="number">1. </span>おもえば</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>えば、<ruby><rb>学生</rb><rt>がく せい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>時代</rb><rt>じ だい</rt></ruby>はみんな<ruby><rb>純粋</rb><rt>じゅん すい</rt></ruby>だった。</span>／<span class="translation">When I think about it now, back in our student days everyone was pure and innocent.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>えば、あのころはよくあなたと<ruby><rb>徹夜</rb><rt>てつ や</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>議論</rb><rt>ぎ ろん</rt></ruby>しましたねえ。</span>／<span class="translation">I remember how we used to stay up all night and argue in those days.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>中島</rb><rt>なか じま</rt></ruby>さん、あのころは<ruby><rb>毎日</rb><rt>まい にち</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>朝</rb><rt>あさ</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>晩</rb><rt>ばん</rt></ruby>までお<ruby><rb>酒</rb><rt>さけ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>飲</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>んでましたよね。</span>／<span class="translation">Nakajima-san, back then you used to drink every day from morning till night, didn’t you?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>ええ、<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>えば、よくもあのときアル<ruby><rb>中</rb><rt>ちゅう</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>死</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>ななかったものですよね。もう<ruby><rb>体</rb><rt>からだ</rt></ruby>じゅうぼろぼろでしたからね。</span>／<span class="translation">Yeah, now that I think about it, it’s a miracle I didn’t die of alcoholism back then. I was a physical wreck.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>えば、あのとき<ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>引</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>止</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>められなければ、<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>はあの<ruby><rb>墜落</rb><rt>つい らく</rt></ruby>した<ruby><rb>飛行機</rb><rt>ひ こう き</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>乗</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>って<ruby><rb>死</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>んでいたのだ。<ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>命</rb><rt>いのち</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>恩人</rb><rt>おん じん</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">When I think back on it, if she hadn’t held me up, I would have gotten on that plane and died when it crashed. I owe her my life.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used at the beginning of a sentence to describe, with a feeling of yearning or nostalgia, a recollection of the past.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x9081"><span class="number">2. </span>いまからおもえば</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>母</rb><rt>はは</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>下宿</rb><rt>げ しゅく</rt></ruby>するのに<ruby><rb>猛反対</rb><rt>もう はん たい</rt></ruby>したが、<ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>えばその<ruby><rb>気持</rb><rt>き も</rt></ruby>ちもわからなくもない。</span>／<span class="translation">My mother was dead set against my moving into a boarding house. Now that I think about it, I can understand something of what she felt.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>あのときは<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>運営</rb><rt>うんえい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>方針</rb><rt>ほう しん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>反発</rb><rt>はん ぱつ</rt></ruby>したが、<ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>えば<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>がああいう<ruby><rb>方針</rb><rt>ほう しん</rt></ruby>をとったことも<ruby><rb>理解</rb><rt>り かい</rt></ruby>できる。</span>／<span class="translation">At the time I opposed his management policy, but now when I think about it, I can understand why he took that kind of approach.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>えば、あのとき<ruby><rb>転職</rb><rt>てん しょく</rt></ruby>しておけばよかったとつくづく<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>います。<ruby><rb>当時</rb><rt>とう じ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>転職</rb><rt>てん しょく</rt></ruby>してもいい<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>ができるとは<ruby><rb>限</rb><rt>かぎ</rt></ruby>らないと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>ってしりごみしたのですけどね。</span>／<span class="translation">Now that I think about it, I really believe I should have changed jobs back then. At the time, though, I thought that even if I changed jobs there would be no guarantee of a good career, so I dragged my feet.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>えば、あのとき<ruby><rb>結婚</rb><rt>けっ こん</rt></ruby>するのをやめてよかったと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>う。<ruby><rb>婚約</rb><rt>こん やく</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>破棄</rb><rt>は き</rt></ruby>したときは、<ruby><rb>本当</rb><rt>ほん  とう</rt></ruby>にこれでいいのかと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>って、ものすごく<ruby><rb>不安</rb><rt>ふ あん</rt></ruby>だったが。</span>／<span class="translation">Now that I think about it, I’m glad I decided not to get married back then. Although when I broke off my engagement, I was really worried about whether or not I was doing the right thing.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means that the speaker is reconsidering a past situation or event. Used when one’s knowledge or opinion has changed and one can now look at things differently. Expresses the notion that one can now understand someone else’s actions, even though it wasn’t possible in the past, or that one now thinks <span class="noSeparate">his/her</span> own past behavior was a mistake, even though <span class="noSeparate">s/he</span> used to think it was appropriate, or vice versa. Example (1) means “At the time, I couldn’t understand the reason why my mother was against it, but now I can,” and (3) means “At the time, I thought I shouldn’t change  jobs, but now I think if I had, I could have gotten a better one.” This expression often describes a contrast between the past and the present. 今から思うと can also be used.</div></body></html>