<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ちっとも...ない</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0415.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ちがいない】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0417.xhtml">【ちなみに】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x35626">【ちっとも...ない】</h1><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>この<ruby><rb>前</rb><rt>まえ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>旅行</rb><rt>りょ こう</rt></ruby>はちっとも<ruby><rb>楽</rb><rt>たの</rt></ruby>しくなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">The last trip was not fun at all.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>日本語</rb><rt>に ほん ご</rt></ruby>がちっとも<ruby><rb>上達</rb><rt>じょう たつ</rt></ruby>しない。</span>／<span class="translation">My Japanese hasn’t improved one bit.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><span class="number">A:</span>ごめんね。</span>／<span class="translation">I’m sorry.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>いや、いや。ちっともかまわないよ。</span>／<span class="translation">No, no, it’s not a problem at all.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>妻</rb><rt>つま</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>髪形</rb><rt>かみ がた</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>変</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>えたのに、<ruby><rb>夫</rb><rt>おっと</rt></ruby>はちっとも<ruby><rb>気</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>がつかなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">His wife changed her hairstyle, but the husband didn’t notice it at all.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>久</rb><rt>ひさ</rt></ruby>しぶりに<ruby><rb>帰国</rb><rt>き こく</rt></ruby>した<ruby><rb>友達</rb><rt>とも だち</rt></ruby>のためにたくさんごちそうを<ruby><rb>作</rb><rt>つく</rt></ruby>ったのに、<ruby><rb>疲</rb><rt>つか</rt></ruby>れていると<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ってちっとも<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べてくれなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">I cooked a lot for my friend who had come home (from abroad) after a long time, but he said he was tired and didn’t eat a bite.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span>ダイビングはこわいものと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>っていたが、やってみたら、ちっともこわくなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">I thought scuba diving was a scary thing, but when I tried it, it wasn’t the least bit scary.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means すこしも/ぜんぜん...ない, and is used to strengthen negativity. It is used in spoken language and is more informal than すこしも. Unlike ぜんぜん, it is not used to express frequency. </div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>ちっとも行ったことがない。／I’ve never been at all.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>ぜんぜん行ったことがない。／I’ve never been there.</div></body></html>