<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ずにはいられない</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0301.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ずにすむ】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0303.xhtml">【ずにはおかない】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x23163">【ずにはいられない】</h1><h4 class="info">［V-ずにはいられない］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>この<ruby><rb>本</rb><rt>ほん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>読</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>むと、<ruby><rb>誰</rb><rt>だれ</rt></ruby>でも<ruby><rb>感動</rb><rt>かん どう</rt></ruby>せずにはいられないだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">Anyone who reads this book will surely be moved by it, I think. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>気持</rb><rt>き も</rt></ruby>ちを<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>うと、<ruby><rb>自分</rb><rt>じ ぶん</rt></ruby>のしたことを<ruby><rb>悔</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>やまずにはいられない。</span>／<span class="translation">When I consider her feelings, I can’t help but feel regret for what I did. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>美</rb><rt>うつく</rt></ruby>しさには<ruby><rb>誰</rb><rt>だれ</rt></ruby>でも<ruby><rb>魅了</rb><rt>み りょう</rt></ruby>されずにはいられなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">No one could help but be captivated by her beauty.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>会社</rb><rt>かい しゃ</rt></ruby>でのストレスを<ruby><rb>解消</rb><rt>かい しょう</rt></ruby>するために<ruby><rb>酒</rb><rt>さけ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>飲</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>まずにはいられない。</span>／<span class="translation">To relieve the stress at my workplace, I can’t do without alcohol. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>その<ruby><rb>冗談</rb><rt>じょう だん</rt></ruby>にはどんなまじめな<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>笑</rb><rt>わら</rt></ruby>わずにはいられないだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">I don’t think anyone, no matter how serious, could help but laugh at that joke.  </span></div><div class="explanation">Means that someone does something in spite of <span class="noSeparate">him/her</span>self, or in spite of <span class="noSeparate">his/her</span> determination to suppress it. Tends to be used in written language. In spoken language, it takes the form ...ないではいられない. </div></body></html>