<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>なぜならば...からだ</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0690.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【なぜかといえば...からだ】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0692.xhtml">【など】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x63424">【なぜならば...からだ】</h1><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>原子力</rb><rt>げん し りょく</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>発電</rb><rt>はつでん</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>反対</rb><rt>はん たい</rt></ruby>です。なぜならば、<ruby><rb>絶対</rb><rt>ぜっ たい</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>安全</rb><rt>あん ぜん</rt></ruby>だという<ruby><rb>保証</rb><rt>ほ しょう</rt></ruby>がないからです。</span>／<span class="translation">I am opposed to nuclear power generation. The reason is that there is no guarantee that it’s absolutely safe.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>殿下</rb><rt>でん か</rt></ruby>のご<ruby><rb>結婚</rb><rt>けっ こん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>相手</rb><rt>あい て</rt></ruby>はまだ<ruby><rb>発表</rb><rt>はっ ぴょう</rt></ruby>するわけにはいかない。なぜならば、<ruby><rb>正式</rb><rt>せい しき</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>会議</rb><rt>かい ぎ</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>決</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>まってないからだ。</span>／<span class="translation">We cannot announce yet that she is going to marry His Imperial Highness. The reason is that it has not been decided at an official meeting.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>車</rb><rt>くるま</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>持</rb><rt>も</rt></ruby>たないで、タクシーを<ruby><rb>利用</rb><rt>り よう</rt></ruby>することにしている。なぜなら、タクシーなら、<ruby><rb>駐車場</rb><rt>ちゅう しゃ じょう</rt></ruby>や<ruby><rb>維持費</rb><rt>い じ ひ</rt></ruby>がかからず、<ruby><rb>結局</rb><rt>けっ きょく</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>安上</rb><rt>やす あ</rt></ruby>がりだからである。</span>／<span class="translation">I use taxis rather than owning a car. This is because, with a taxi, there aren’t any parking or maintenance costs, so it’s cheaper in the long run.</span></div><div class="explanation">なぜならば...からだ is used to explain the underlying circumstances or reason for what has been stated in the previous sentence. ば is sometimes omitted. This pattern tends to be used in written Japanese, or in spoken Japanese for formal situations. In daily conversation, it is more common to use なぜかというと／なぜかといえば...からだ.</div></body></html>