<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>んじゃない</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part1084.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【んじゃ】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part1086.xhtml">【んじゃないか】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x108388">【んじゃない】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x108390"><span class="number">1. </span>んじゃない</h2><h4 class="info">［N／Na　（なん）じゃない］</h4><h4 class="info">［A／V　んじゃない］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>あの<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>山田</rb><rt>やま だ</rt></ruby>さんなんじゃない？</span>／<span class="translation">Isn’t that person Yamada-san?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>ほら、<ruby><rb>顔</rb><rt>かお</rt></ruby>があかくなった。あなた、<ruby><rb>山田</rb><rt>やま だ</rt></ruby>さんが<ruby><rb>好</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>きなんじゃないの？</span>／<span class="translation">Hey, you’re blushing! Is it because you like Yamada-san?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>それ、いいんじゃない？　<ruby><rb>悪</rb><rt>わる</rt></ruby>くないと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>うよ。</span>／<span class="translation">It is good, isn’t it? I don’t think it’s bad.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>かぎ？　テーブルの<ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>うえ</rt></ruby>にあるんじゃない？</span>／<span class="translation">The key? Isn’t it on the table?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>佐藤</rb><rt>さ とう</rt></ruby>さん？　もう<ruby><rb>帰</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>ったんじゃない？</span>／<span class="translation">Sato-san? Hasn’t she already gone home?</span></div><div class="explanation">An informal form of のではないか. Pronounced with a rising intonation. As in example (2), んじゃないの can also be used. Men also use んじゃないか. In polite Japanese it becomes んじゃありません.</div><h4 class="reference">→<a href="part0485.xhtml#idtitlex1x44039">【ではないか<sub class="Subscript">2</sub>】</a></h4><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x108442"><span class="number">2. </span>V-るんじゃない</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>そんなところで<ruby><rb>遊</rb><rt>あそ</rt></ruby>ぶんじゃない。</span>／<span class="translation">Don’t play in that sort of place!</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>電車</rb><rt>でん しゃ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>中</rb><rt>なか</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>走</rb><rt>はし</rt></ruby>るんじゃない！</span>／<span class="translation">No running inside the train!</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>そんなきたないものを<ruby><rb>口</rb><rt>くち</rt></ruby>にいれるんじゃない！</span>／<span class="translation">Don’t put such a dirty thing in your mouth!</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>そんな<ruby><rb>小</rb><rt>ちい</rt></ruby>さい<ruby><rb>子</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>突</rb><rt>つ</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>飛</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>ばすんじゃない！</span>／<span class="translation">Don’t push such a little child!</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>いじめられて<ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>きな<ruby><rb>心</rb><rt>こころ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>傷</rb><rt>きず</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>負</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>っている<ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>対</rb><rt>たい</rt></ruby>して、そんなに<ruby><rb>頭</rb><rt>あたま</rt></ruby>ごなしに「もっと<ruby><rb>強</rb><rt>つよ</rt></ruby>くなれ」だなんて<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>うんじゃないよ。</span>／<span class="translation">You shouldn’t keep saying things like “be stronger!” so unrelentingly to a child who has been bullied and who bears such major emotional scars. </span></div><div class="explanation">Used to prohibit the listener’s actions. Pronounced with a falling intonation. A spoken expression used more often by men. Women often use the polite form んじゃありません.</div></body></html>