<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>をたよりに</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part1073.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【をぜんていに】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part1075.xhtml">【をちゅうしんに】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x107875">【をたよりに】</h1><h4 class="info">［NをたよりにV］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>あなたがいなければ、これからわたしは<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なに</rt></ruby>をたよりに（して）<ruby><rb>生</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>きていけばいいのですか。</span>／<span class="translation">If you are not going to be there for me, what should I look up to as my guide in life?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>その<ruby><rb>留学生</rb><rt>りゅう がく せい</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>辞書</rb><rt>じ しょ</rt></ruby>をたよりに、ひとりで「<ruby><rb>橋</rb><rt>はし</rt></ruby>のない<ruby><rb>川</rb><rt>かわ</rt></ruby>」を<ruby><rb>読</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>みつづけている。</span>／<span class="translation">That exchange student continues reading “The River with no Bridge” by himself with the help of a dictionary.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>白</rb><rt>しろ</rt></ruby>いつえだけをたよりに、その<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>は 70 <ruby><rb>年</rb><rt>ねん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>生</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>き、そして<ruby><rb>死</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>んでいった。</span>／<span class="translation">That person lived to seventy relying solely on a white cane and then died.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>もちまえの<ruby><rb>行動力</rb><rt>こう どう りょく</rt></ruby>だけをたよりに、<ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>はバイクで<ruby><rb>世界中</rb><rt>せ かい じゅう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>旅</rb><rt>たび</rt></ruby>している。</span>／<span class="translation">She is traveling all over the world on a bike relying solely on her own resourcefulness.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “with the aid of something,” “depending on something.” In speech ...をたよりにして and ...をたよりとして are also used. Similar expressions are ...をたのみにして and ...をたのみとして.</div></body></html>