<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>にこたえて</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0776.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【にこたえ】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0778.xhtml">【にさいし】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x71176">【にこたえて】</h1><h4 class="info">［Nにこたえて］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>その<ruby><rb>選手</rb><rt>せん しゅ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>両親</rb><rt>りょう しん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>期待</rb><rt>き たい</rt></ruby>にこたえてみごとに<ruby><rb>完走</rb><rt>かん そう</rt></ruby>した。</span>／<span class="translation">The athlete met the expectations of her parents and reached her goal splendidly. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>多数</rb><rt>た すう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>学生</rb><rt>がく せい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>要望</rb><rt>よう ぼう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>応</rb><rt>こた</rt></ruby>えまして、<ruby><rb>日曜日</rb><rt>にち よう び</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>図書館</rb><rt>と しょ かん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>開館</rb><rt>かい かん</rt></ruby>することにしました。</span>／<span class="translation">In order to fulfill the demand of many students, we have decided to open the library on Sundays, too. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>多</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>くの<ruby><rb>消費者</rb><rt>しょう ひ しゃ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>皆様</rb><rt>みな さま</rt></ruby>のご<ruby><rb>意見</rb><rt>い けん</rt></ruby>にお<ruby><rb>応</rb><rt>こた</rt></ruby>えして、この<ruby><rb>程</rb><rt>ほど</rt></ruby>、より<ruby><rb>使</rb><rt>つか</rt></ruby>いやすい<ruby><rb>製品</rb><rt>せい ひん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>発売</rb><rt>はつ ばい</rt></ruby>いたしました。</span>／<span class="translation">To satisfy the needs of many customers, we recently launched a new product which is even more user-friendly.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>国連</rb><rt>こく れん</rt></ruby>からの<ruby><rb>要請</rb><rt>よう せい</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>応</rb><rt>こた</rt></ruby>えて、<ruby><rb>政府</rb><rt>せい ふ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>救援</rb><rt>きゅう えん</rt></ruby>チームを<ruby><rb>派遣</rb><rt>は けん</rt></ruby>することにした。</span>／<span class="translation">To comply with a request from the United Nations, the government has decided to dispatch a rescue corps there.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>多</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>くのファンの<ruby><rb>声援</rb><rt>せい えん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>応</rb><rt>こた</rt></ruby>える<ruby><rb>完璧</rb><rt>かん ぺき</rt></ruby>なプレーをなしとげた。</span>／<span class="translation">He finally demonstrated a perfect shot in answer to the cheers of his many fans.</span></div><div class="explanation">With a noun expressing “expectation” or “request,” にこたえて expresses the meaning of “to realize something.” Becomes NにこたえるN when modifying a noun. A rather formal, written expression.</div></body></html>