<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ようだ1</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part1025.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ようするに】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part1027.xhtml">【ようだ<sub class="variation">2</sub>】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x102542">【ようだ<sub class="variation">1</sub>】</h1><h4 class="info">［Nのようだ］</h4><h4 class="info">［A／V　ようだ］</h4><div class="explanation">Conjugating <i>na</i>-adjectives, this becomes ように and ような in the continuative and attributive forms.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x102565"><span class="number">1. </span>...ようだ〈simile〉</h2><h3 class="subsubtitle" id="idsubsubtitlex1x102568"><span class="number">a. </span>...ようだ</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>この<ruby><rb>雪</rb><rt>ゆき</rt></ruby>はまるで<ruby><rb>綿</rb><rt>わた</rt></ruby>のようです。</span>／<span class="translation">This snow is just like cotton wool.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>心</rb><rt>こころ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>氷</rb><rt>こおり</rt></ruby>のように<ruby><rb>冷</rb><rt>つめ</rt></ruby>たい。</span>／<span class="translation">Her heart is as cold as ice.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>男</rb><rt>おとこ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>狂</rb><rt>くる</rt></ruby>ったように<ruby><rb>走</rb><rt>はし</rt></ruby>り<ruby><rb>続</rb><rt>つづ</rt></ruby>けた。</span>／<span class="translation">He kept running like mad.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>赤</rb><rt>あか</rt></ruby>ん<ruby><rb>坊</rb><rt>ぼう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>火</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby>がついたように<ruby><rb>泣</rb><rt>な</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>だ</rt></ruby>した。</span>／<span class="translation">The baby burst out crying as if she were on fire.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>あたりは、<ruby><rb>水</rb><rt>みず</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>打</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>ったように<ruby><rb>静</rb><rt>しず</rt></ruby>まりかえっている。</span>／<span class="translation">The area suddenly became completely silent.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>新製品</rb><rt>しん せい ひん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>面白</rb><rt>おも しろ</rt></ruby>いようによく<ruby><rb>売</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>れた。</span>／<span class="translation">The new product sold like hot cakes.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（7）</span>6<ruby><rb>月</rb><rt>がつ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>たばかりなのに<ruby><rb>真夏</rb><rt>ま なつ</rt></ruby>のような<ruby><rb>暑</rb><rt>あつ</rt></ruby>さだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Although June has just begun, it is hot like midsummer. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（8）</span><ruby><rb>会場</rb><rt>かい じょう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>割</rb><rt>わ</rt></ruby>れるような<ruby><rb>拍手</rb><rt>はく しゅ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>渦</rb><rt>うず</rt></ruby>につつまれた。</span>／<span class="translation">The venue was engulfed by the tumultuous applause.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（9）</span><ruby><rb>身</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>切</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>るような<ruby><rb>寒</rb><rt>さむ</rt></ruby>さが<ruby><rb>続</rb><rt>つづ</rt></ruby>いている。</span>／<span class="translation">The biting coldness continues.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to liken a situation, quality, form, or action to something which is essentially different. Not only used to liken a thing to something with similar properties but also to entirely distinct, fanciful, things. Often attached to nouns and verbs but, occasionally, as in example (6), also attached to <i>i</i>-adjectives. However, cannot be attached to <i>na</i>-adjectives. Also, sometimes used with accompanying adverbs which are used to express similes, such as あたかも, いかにも, さながら, まるで and ちょうど.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>町はすっかりさびれてしまって、まるで火が消えたようだ。／The town is in complete decline, just like a fire has gone out.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>家族が一堂に揃い、あたかも盆と正月がいっしょに来たようだ。／To have the family all together in one room is just like the <i>Bon</i> Festival and the New Year’s holiday have come at the same time. (= a very busy and happy time)</div><div class="explanation">Often appears in customary, fixed expressions. Idiomatic expressions other than those which appear here are: 雲をつかむような話／竹を割ったような性格／血のにじむような努力／手が切れるような新札／飛ぶように売れる／目を皿のようにして探す (a vague story/a straightforward character/to sweat blood/a crisp new note/to sell like hot cakes/to search with wide eyes) .</div><div class="explanation">In speech, みたいだ is often used. Furthermore, in writing ごとし can also be used.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x102682"><span class="number">b. </span>V-る／V-た　かのようだ</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>はなにも<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>らなかったかのように<ruby><rb>振</rb><rt>ふ</rt></ruby>る<ruby><rb>舞</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>っていた。</span>／<span class="translation">He was acting as though he didn't know anything.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>父</rb><rt>ちち</rt></ruby>はあらかじめ<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>っていたかのように、<ruby><rb>平然</rb><rt>へい ぜん</rt></ruby>としていた。</span>／<span class="translation">My father was calm, as though he already knew.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>本当</rb><rt>ほん  とう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>たこともないのに、いかにも<ruby><rb>自分</rb><rt>じ ぶん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>目</rb><rt>め</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>てきたかのように<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はな</rt></ruby>す。</span>／<span class="translation">You haven’t even seen (it) but you talk as though you have.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>極楽</rb><rt>ごく らく</rt></ruby>にでもいるかのような<ruby><rb>幸</rb><rt>しあわ</rt></ruby>せな<ruby><rb>気分</rb><rt>き ぶん</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">I’m so happy I feel like I’m in paradise.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>犯人</rb><rt>はん にん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>事件</rb><rt>じ けん</rt></ruby>のことを<ruby><rb>初</rb><rt>はじ</rt></ruby>めて<ruby><rb>聞</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>いたかのような<ruby><rb>態度</rb><rt>たい ど</rt></ruby>をとった。</span>／<span class="translation">The criminal acted as though he was hearing about the incident for the first time.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span>あたり<ruby><rb>一面</rb><rt>いち めん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>霧</rb><rt>きり</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>包</rb><rt>つつ</rt></ruby>まれ、まるで<ruby><rb>別世界</rb><rt>べっ せ かい</rt></ruby>にいるかのようだ。</span>／<span class="translation">The whole area is enveloped in mist; it is like I am in another world.</span></div><div class="explanation">Taking the dictionary or <i>ta</i>-form of a verb, expresses that, although in reality (it) is not the case, one’s conduct or feeling is that it is. It is often used in cases which pick out things as examples which are inconsistent with reality or are imaginary.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x102734"><span class="number">2. </span>...ような／...ように</h2><h3 class="subsubtitle" id="idsubsubtitlex1x102740"><span class="number">a. </span>...ように〈example〉</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>あの<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>のように<ruby><rb>英語</rb><rt>えい ご</rt></ruby>がペラペラ<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はな</rt></ruby>せたらいいのに。</span>／<span class="translation">I wish I could speak English as fluently as that person.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>ニューヨークのように<ruby><rb>世界中</rb><rt>せ かい じゅう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>人々</rb><rt>ひと びと</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>住</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>む<ruby><rb>都市</rb><rt>と し</rt></ruby>では、<ruby><rb>各国</rb><rt>かっ こく</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>本格的</rb><rt>ほん かく てき</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>料理</rb><rt>りょう り</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>味</rb><rt>あじ</rt></ruby>わうことができる。</span>／<span class="translation">In cities like New York, where people from all around the world live, you can taste authentic food from many countries.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>母親</rb><rt>はは おや</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>美人</rb><rt>び じん</rt></ruby>だったように、<ruby><rb>娘</rb><rt>むすめ</rt></ruby>たちもみな<ruby><rb>美人</rb><rt>び じん</rt></ruby>ぞろいだ。</span>／<span class="translation">The daughters are all beauties like their mother was.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>発音</rb><rt>はつ おん</rt></ruby>するようにあとについて<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ってください。</span>／<span class="translation">Please pronounce it as I do, after me.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>先生</rb><rt>せん せい</rt></ruby>がおっしゃったようにお<ruby><rb>伝</rb><rt>つた</rt></ruby>えしておきました。</span>／<span class="translation">I told it as my teacher told it to me.</span></div><div class="explanation">Taking the form XようにY, used to give a specific person or thing as an example of conformity/consistency in quality, content or method with Y. Example (4) means “to imitate an action” and (5) can be rephrased as とおりに.  </div><div class="explanation">In contrast to Usage 1 inようだ〈simile〉, an expression which compares an essentially different and distinct thing to X in the phrase まるでXのように, with this usage X is given as an example of a specific thing which shares a property or content with Y. However, it is not always possible to distinguish between these two usages.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x102796"><span class="number">b. </span>...ようなN〈example〉</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>風邪</rb><rt>か ぜ</rt></ruby>をひいたときは、みかんのような<ruby><rb>ビタミンC</rb><rt>びたみんC</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>多</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>く<ruby><rb>含</rb><rt>ふく</rt></ruby>む<ruby><rb>果物</rb><rt>くだ もの</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べるといい。</span>／<span class="translation">When you catch a cold, it’s good to eat a lot of fruit like oranges which contain a lot of vitamin C.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>あなたのようなご<ruby><rb>親切</rb><rt>しん せつ</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>かた</rt></ruby>にはなかなか<ruby><rb>出会</rb><rt>で あ</rt></ruby>えません。</span>／<span class="translation">It’s not very often we meet people as kind as you.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>これはどこにでもあるようなものではない。</span>／<span class="translation">This is not the kind of thing you find everywhere.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>はあなたが<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>っているような<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>ではない。</span>／<span class="translation">He is not the kind of person you think he is.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>このまま<ruby><rb>放</rb><rt>ほう</rt></ruby>っておくと、<ruby><rb>取</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>り<ruby><rb>返</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>しがつかないようなことになりかねない。</span>／<span class="translation">If you leave it as it is, it’s quite possible that you won’t be able to sort it out. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span>これを<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べても<ruby><rb>死</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>ぬようなことはありません。<ruby><rb>安心</rb><rt>あん しん</rt></ruby>してください。</span>／<span class="translation">You won’t die if you eat this. Please rest assured.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（7）</span><ruby><rb>薬</rb><rt>くすり</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>飲</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>んでもよくならないような<ruby><rb>場合</rb><rt>ば あい</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>医者</rb><rt>い しゃ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>相談</rb><rt>そう だん</rt></ruby>してください。</span>／<span class="translation">In cases where you do not recover after taking medicine, please consult your doctor.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to give a concrete example of the noun which follows it. For example, in みかんのような果物(a fruit like an orange), the latter noun represents a higher concept than the former. When continued after a clause, the sentence can be valid without ような but there will be some difference in the meaning if it is included or not. For example, if ような is removed from (7) as 薬を飲んでもよくならない場合 it refers to a specific situation where “the condition does not improve after taking the medicine,” but in case of 薬を飲んでもよくならないような場合 then it means “cases like when you take the medicine but the condition does not improve” indicating that there are many other similar situations.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x102854"><span class="number">c. </span>...ように〈introductory utterance〉</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>ご<ruby><rb>存</rb><rt>ぞん</rt></ruby>じのように、<ruby><rb>日本</rb><rt>に ほん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>人口密度</rb><rt>じん こう みつ ど</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>高</rb><rt>たか</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>国</rb><rt>くに</rt></ruby>です。</span>／<span class="translation">As you know, Japan is a country with a high density of population.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>あなたがおっしゃっていたように、<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>本当</rb><rt>ほん  とう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>素敵</rb><rt>す てき</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>かた</rt></ruby>ですね。</span>／<span class="translation">As you were saying, he’s a really lovely man.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>すでに<ruby><rb>述</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>べたようにアフリカの<ruby><rb>食糧</rb><rt>しょく りょう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>不足</rb><rt>ぶ そく</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>深刻</rb><rt>しん こく</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>状況</rb><rt>じょう きょう</rt></ruby>にある。</span>／<span class="translation">As has already been mentioned, Africa’s food shortage is serious.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>ことわざにもあるように、<ruby><rb>外国</rb><rt>がい こく</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ったらその<ruby><rb>国</rb><rt>くに</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>習慣</rb><rt>しゅう かん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>従</rb><rt>したが</rt></ruby>って<ruby><rb>暮</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>らすのが<ruby><rb>一番</rb><rt>いち ばん</rt></ruby>である。</span>／<span class="translation">As the maxim says, when you go abroad, it’s best to live by the customs of that country.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>あのにこにこした<ruby><rb>表情</rb><rt>ひょう じょう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>表</rb><rt>あらわ</rt></ruby>しているように、<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>はとても<ruby><rb>明</rb><rt>あか</rt></ruby>るい<ruby><rb>性格</rb><rt>せい かく</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>です。</span>／<span class="translation">As his smiling expression shows, he has a very cheerful character.</span></div><div class="explanation">Shows that what is about to be said is consistent with what has been stated previously or is a well-known fact. Used to give notice that further explanation is about to be given. Can be replaced with とおり.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x102897"><span class="number">d. </span>つぎのように／いかのように</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>結果</rb><rt>けっ か</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>次</rb><rt>つぎ</rt></ruby>のようにまとめることができる。</span>／<span class="translation">The results can be summarized in the following manner.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>中</rb><rt>なか</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>以下</rb><rt>い か</rt></ruby>のような<ruby><rb>意見</rb><rt>い けん</rt></ruby>もあった。</span>／<span class="translation">Among them there were the following kinds of opinion.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>本稿</rb><rt>ほん こう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>結論</rb><rt>けつ ろん</rt></ruby>をまとめれば、<ruby><rb>次</rb><rt>つぎ</rt></ruby>のようになる。</span>／<span class="translation">We can summarize the article’s conclusions as follows.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>以下</rb><rt>い か</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>示</rb><rt>しめ</rt></ruby>すように、<ruby><rb>我</rb><rt>わ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>国</rb><rt>くに</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>出生率</rb><rt>しゅっ しょう りつ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>下</rb><rt>さ</rt></ruby>がる<ruby><rb>一方</rb><rt>いっ ぽう</rt></ruby>である。</span>／<span class="translation">As seen below, the birthrate of our country is declining.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to announce that concrete detail is to follow. In vertical text compositions, 右のように and 左のように are also used.</div></body></html>