<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>がてら</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0127.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【かつて】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0129.xhtml">【かというと】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x11510">【がてら】</h1><h4 class="info">［Nがてら］</h4><h4 class="info">［R-がてら］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>物</rb><rt>もの</rt></ruby>がてら、その<ruby><rb>辺</rb><rt>へん</rt></ruby>をぶらぶらしない？</span>／<span class="translation">While we’re shopping, why don’t we take a stroll around the place?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>散歩</rb><rt>さん ぽ</rt></ruby>がてら、パンを<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>いに<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>こう。</span>／<span class="translation">Let’s go buy some bread on our walk.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>引</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby>っ<ruby><rb>越</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>してきてから2<ruby><rb>週間</rb><rt>しゅう かん</rt></ruby>ほどの<ruby><rb>間</rb><rt>あいだ</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>運動</rb><rt>うん どう</rt></ruby>がてら<ruby><rb>近所</rb><rt>きん じょ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>町</rb><rt>まち</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>歩</rb><rt>ある</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>回</rb><rt>まわ</rt></ruby>った。</span>／<span class="translation">In the two weeks since I moved here, I’ve walked around the neighborhood partly for exercise.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>映画</rb><rt>えい が</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>評論家</rb><rt>ひょう ろん か</rt></ruby>なので、<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>がてらよくアジアの<ruby><rb>映画</rb><rt>えい が</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>ることがあるそうだ。</span>／<span class="translation">He is a movie critic, so he often watches Asian movies as part of his work.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>京都</rb><rt>きょう と</rt></ruby>においでの<ruby><rb>節</rb><rt>せつ</rt></ruby>は、お<ruby><rb>遊</rb><rt>あそ</rt></ruby>びがてらぜひ<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>どものところへもお<ruby><rb>立</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>ち<ruby><rb>寄</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>りください。</span>／<span class="translation">When you visit Kyoto, please do stop by at our house as well.</span></div><div class="explanation">Attaches to a noun that expresses an action or a verb stem. Used in the form XがてらY and means “combining action X with another action Y.” Often used when doing X results in being able to do Y. XをかねてY and XかたがたY are also used to express the same meaning.</div></body></html>