<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ところ1</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0575.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【どことなく】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0577.xhtml">【ところ<sub class="variation">2</sub>】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x54102">【ところ<sub class="variation">1</sub>】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x54105"><span class="number">1. </span>Nのところ</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>のところ<ruby><rb>患者</rb><rt>かん じゃ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>小康状態</rb><rt>しょう こう じょう たい</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>保</rb><rt>たも</rt></ruby>っています。</span>／<span class="translation">At present the patient’s condition is stable. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>現在</rb><rt>げん ざい</rt></ruby>のところ<ruby><rb>応募者</rb><rt>おう ぼ しゃ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>約</rb><rt>やく</rt></ruby> 100 <ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>にん</rt></ruby>ほどです。</span>／<span class="translation">We currently have about 100 applicants. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>このところ<ruby><rb>肌寒</rb><rt>はだ ざむ</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>日</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>続</rb><rt>つづ</rt></ruby>いている。</span>／<span class="translation">We’re having a spell of chilly weather these days. </span></div><div class="explanation">Attaches to nouns denoting the present, such as 今 (now), げんざい (at present), and この... (this...). Expresses a situation as of the present moment, as in “at the present stage, at this point, recently.”</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x54136"><span class="number">2. </span>V-るところとなる</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>この<ruby><rb>政治的</rb><rt>せい じ てき</rt></ruby>スキャンダルは<ruby><rb>遠</rb><rt>とお</rt></ruby>からず<ruby><rb>世界中</rb><rt>せ かい じゅう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>人々</rb><rt>ひと びと</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>るところとなるだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">It won’t be long before this political scandal becomes known to people all over the world.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>らの<ruby><rb>別居</rb><rt>べっ きょ</rt></ruby>はたちまち<ruby><rb>周囲</rb><rt>しゅう い</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>るところとなった。</span>／<span class="translation">The news of their separation immediately became common knowledge to everyone around them. </span></div><div class="explanation">Means that a rumor or news becomes common knowledge. Usually used in the form 知るところとなる. Has the tone of written language. </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x54161"><span class="number">3. </span>V-るところに　よると／よれば</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>聞</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>くところによれば、あの<ruby><rb>二人</rb><rt>ふたり</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>離婚</rb><rt>り こん</rt></ruby>したそうだ。</span>／<span class="translation">According to what I hear, apparently those two have divorced. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>現地</rb><rt>げん ち</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>記者</rb><rt>き しゃ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はな</rt></ruby>すところによると、<ruby><rb>戦況</rb><rt>せん きょう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>悪化</rb><rt>あっ か</rt></ruby>する<ruby><rb>一方</rb><rt>いっ ぽう</rt></ruby>のようである。</span>／<span class="translation">The reporters on location are saying that the war situation is steadily worsening. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>特派員</rb><rt>とく は いん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>伝</rb><rt>つた</rt></ruby>えるところによると、アフリカの<ruby><rb>飢饉</rb><rt>き きん</rt></ruby>はさらに<ruby><rb>悪化</rb><rt>あっ か</rt></ruby>しているらしい。</span>／<span class="translation">What we hear from the special correspondents is that the famine in Africa seems to be getting even worse.</span></div><div class="explanation">Uses verbs that denote the output or transfer of information, like 聞く (hear), 話す (speak), or 伝える (tell), and is followed by a clause that specifies the information that has been relayed. The sentence often ends with expressions such as らしい (seem/appear), そうだ (they say/I hear), or とのことだ (so they say). Often used in news reports.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x54192"><span class="number">4. </span>V-る／V-ている　ところのN</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>るところの<ruby><rb>限</rb><rt>かぎ</rt></ruby>りでは、そのようなことは<ruby><rb>一切</rb><rt>いっ さい</rt></ruby>ございません。</span>／<span class="translation">As far as I know, that is not the case at all. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>目指</rb><rt>め ざ</rt></ruby>すところの<ruby><rb>理想</rb><rt>り そう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>社会</rb><rt>しゃ かい</rt></ruby>とは、<ruby><rb>身分</rb><rt>み ぶん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>差別</rb><rt>さ べつ</rt></ruby>のないすべての<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>平等</rb><rt>びょう どう</rt></ruby>であるような<ruby><rb>社会</rb><rt>しゃ かい</rt></ruby>であった。</span>／<span class="translation">The ideal society to which he aspired was one in which there is no discrimination according to status but equality among all people.</span></div><div class="explanation">This expression is a rather direct translation of relative pronouns used in Western languages. In Japanese it is possible to say, for example, 彼の目指す理想の社会 (the ideal society he aspires to), so there is usually no need to use this expression; when it is used, it sounds like a translation. Used mostly in written language.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x54217"><span class="number">5. </span>V-るところまでV</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>堕</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>ちるところまで<ruby><rb>堕</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>ちてしまった。</span>／<span class="translation">She sank as low as it was possible for her to sink.  </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>とにかく、<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>けるところまで<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ってみよう。</span>／<span class="translation">At any rate, let’s try to go as far as we can. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>時間内</rb><rt>じ かん ない</rt></ruby>にやれるところまでやってみてください。</span>／<span class="translation">Please try to do as much as you can in the allotted time.  </span></div><div class="explanation">The same verb is used at the beginning and end of this pattern to express the notion that an action or change reaches its utmost limit or an ultimate stage. When the potential form V-れる is used, as in (2) and (3), the meaning is that the action is performed to the greatest extent possible. </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x54248"><span class="number">6. </span>V-ているところをみると</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>平気</rb><rt>へい き</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>顔</rb><rt>かお</rt></ruby>をしているところをみると、まだ<ruby><rb>事故</rb><rt>じ こ</rt></ruby>のことを<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>らせられてないのだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">From the calm expression on his face, I would guess that he hasn’t heard about the accident yet. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>大勢</rb><rt>おお ぜい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>行列</rb><rt>ぎょう れつ</rt></ruby>しているところを<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>ると、<ruby><rb>安</rb><rt>やす</rt></ruby>くておいしい<ruby><rb>店</rb><rt>みせ</rt></ruby>のようだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Judging from the long line of people, it looks like a good restaurant with reasonable prices.  </span></div><div class="explanation">Used when the speaker is stating a supposition based on firsthand experience.  At the end of the sentence, expressions such as らしい (seem/appear), ようだ (like/as if), or にちがいない (must be/without a doubt) are often used. The forms ...ところから and ...ところからみて may also be used.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>高級車に乗っているところから、相当の金持ちだと思われる。／Seeing as he drives a luxury car, we can presume he’s quite wealthy.  </div></body></html>