<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ぜひ</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0313.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【せつな】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0315.xhtml">【せめて】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x24691">【ぜひ】</h1><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>ぜひ<ruby><rb>一度</rb><rt>いち ど</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>遊</rb><rt>あそ</rt></ruby>びにきてください。</span>／<span class="translation">Please be sure to come and visit me sometime.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>《<ruby><rb>引越</rb><rt>ひっ こ</rt></ruby>しのあいさつ<ruby><rb>状</rb><rt>じょう</rt></ruby>》お<ruby><rb>近</rb><rt>ちか</rt></ruby>くにおいでの<ruby><rb>節</rb><rt>せつ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>是非</rb><rt>ぜ ひ</rt></ruby>ともお<ruby><rb>立</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>ち<ruby><rb>寄</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>りください。</span>／<span class="translation">《on a postcard giving notice of a change of address》Please be sure to visit us when you are in the area.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>この<ruby><rb>大学</rb><rt>だい がく</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>卒業</rb><rt>そつ ぎょう</rt></ruby>する<ruby><rb>皆</rb><rt>みな</rt></ruby>さんは、ぜひ<ruby><rb>世</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>中</rb><rt>なか</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>役</rb><rt>やく</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>立</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>つような<ruby><rb>人間</rb><rt>にん げん</rt></ruby>になってもらいたいものだと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>います。</span>／<span class="translation">I sincerely hope that all of you who are graduating from this university will become useful members of society.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>友人</rb><rt>ゆう じん</rt></ruby>から、<ruby><rb>引</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby>っ<ruby><rb>越</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>したからぜひ<ruby><rb>遊</rb><rt>あそ</rt></ruby>びに<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>るようにという<ruby><rb>電話</rb><rt>でん わ</rt></ruby>がかかってきた。</span>／<span class="translation">A friend phoned to say please visit because they’ve moved to a new house.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>有能</rb><rt>ゆう のう</rt></ruby>だから<ruby><rb>結婚</rb><rt>けっ こん</rt></ruby>してもぜひ<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>続</rb><rt>つづ</rt></ruby>けてほしい。</span>／<span class="translation">She’s very capable, so I really hope she keeps working even after she gets married.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “by all means” or “definitely.” Combines with expressions of request using てください, or expressions of hope/desire using てほしい, in order to express a strong wish. Not usually used with forms expressing a negative wish.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>ぜひ話さないでください。／By all means, please don’t tell anyone.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>ぜったいに話さないで下さい。／Don’t tell anyone, no matter what.</div><div class="explanation">Also, it can only be used with respect to the activities of human beings.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>あしたはぜひ晴れてほしい。／I hope tomorrow will by all means be sunny.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>あしたは何としても晴れてほしい。／I really hope it will be sunny tomorrow.</div><div class="explanation">To emphasize expressions of intention, adverbs such as かならず are used.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>ぜひそこに参ります。／I’ll go there by all means.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>かならずそこに参ります。／I’ll definitely go there.</div><div class="explanation">However, ぜひ can be used to reply to a request, as for example in ぜひ行かせていただきます (I would very much like to go). This is a formal expression.</div></body></html>