<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ないかな</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0646.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ないかしら】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0648.xhtml">【ないことはない】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x60436">【ないかな】</h1><div class="explanation">...ないかな consists of the negative form of an inflected word combined with かな, which expresses uncertainty on the part of the speaker. It is used for both self-addressed questions and questions addressed to others. Unlike かしら, ないかな can be used by both male and female speakers. However, since this expression is not polite language, when it is used to address others it should be used only with interlocutors who have a close relationship to the speaker.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x60451"><span class="number">1. </span>...かな（あ）〈wish, desire〉</h2><h4 class="info">［V-ない／V-れない　かなあ］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-てくれないかなあ］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>早</rb><rt>はや</rt></ruby>く<ruby><rb>夏休</rb><rt>なつ やす</rt></ruby>みにならないかなあ。</span>／<span class="translation">I can’t wait for summer vacation.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>今夜</rb><rt>こん や</rt></ruby>いい<ruby><rb>夢</rb><rt>ゆめ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>られないかな。</span>／<span class="translation">I hope I’ll have a good dream tonight.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>息子</rb><rt>むすこ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>一流</rb><rt>いち りゅう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>大学</rb><rt>だい がく</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>はい</rt></ruby>ってくれないかな。</span>／<span class="translation">I wish my son would enter a top-class university.</span></div><div class="explanation">When ないかな takes the negative form of a verb referring to an action, a change of state, or existence, or the negative form of the potential V-れる, it means “I hope so” or “I wish it would happen.” Expresses the speaker’s hope, wish, or desire.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x60489"><span class="number">2. </span>...かな（あ）〈conjecture, concern〉</h2><h4 class="info">［N／Na　ではないかなあ］</h4><h4 class="info">［A-くないかなあ］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-ないかなあ］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>あの<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>森田</rb><rt>もり た</rt></ruby>さんの<ruby><rb>奥</rb><rt>おく</rt></ruby>さんじゃないかな。</span>／<span class="translation">I wonder if that person isn’t Morita-san’s wife.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>だったら<ruby><rb>大丈夫</rb><rt>だい じょう ぶ</rt></ruby>じゃないかな。</span>／<span class="translation">If it’s him, I guess he’ll be fine with it.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>こっちのほうがよくないか。</span>／<span class="translation">Isn’t it better this way?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>にはちょっと<ruby><rb>難</rb><rt>むずか</rt></ruby>しすぎないかな。</span>／<span class="translation">Isn’t this a little bit too difficult for a child?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>この<ruby><rb>靴</rb><rt>くつ</rt></ruby>、ちょっと<ruby><rb>小</rb><rt>ちい</rt></ruby>さくないかな。</span>／<span class="translation">I wonder if these shoes aren’t a bit small.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span>あんなことを<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>って、<ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>怒</rb><rt>おこ</rt></ruby>っていないかな。</span>／<span class="translation">I wonder if she’s upset because I said such a thing to her.</span></div><div class="explanation">When used with the negative form of a predicate, ...かな(あ) expresses a conjecture, like “I’m not completely sure, but it just might be so,” or a feeling of anxiety or concern, like “I’m concerned/I have the sense that....” If the speaker is talking to <span class="noSeparate">him/her</span>self, ...かな(あ) functions as a self-addressed question, but if this expression is addressed to a listener, it means “don’t you think so?” and functions as an inquiry regarding the listener’s judgment.</div></body></html>