<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>んじゃないか</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part1085.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【んじゃない】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part1087.xhtml">【んじゃないだろうか】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x108487">【んじゃないか】</h1><h4 class="info">［N／Na　（なん）じゃないか］</h4><h4 class="info">［A／V　んじゃないか］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>明日</rb><rt>あ す</rt></ruby>はひょっとしたら<ruby><rb>雪</rb><rt>ゆき</rt></ruby>なんじゃないか。<ruby><rb>雪雲</rb><rt>ゆき ぐも</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>てきたよ。</span>／<span class="translation">Might it perhaps snow tomorrow? There are snow clouds.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>あの<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>野菜</rb><rt>や さい</rt></ruby>がきらいなんじゃないか。こんなに<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べ<ruby><rb>残</rb><rt>のこ</rt></ruby>しているよ。</span>／<span class="translation">That person must hate vegetables. He’s left this much food.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>あの<ruby><rb>子</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>寒</rb><rt>さむ</rt></ruby>いんじゃないかな。くしゃみしてるよ。</span>／<span class="translation">That child must be cold. He’s sneezing.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>田中</rb><rt>た なか</rt></ruby>さんも<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>るんじゃないか。<ruby><rb>鈴木</rb><rt>すず き</rt></ruby>さんがつれてくるって<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ってたから。</span>／<span class="translation">Isn’t Tanaka-san coming too? Suzuki-san said he was bringing her.</span></div><div class="explanation">This is a spoken expression for (の)ではないか. The polite form is んじゃありませんか.</div><h4 class="reference">→<a href="part0277.xhtml#idtitlex1x21838">【じゃないか<sub class="Subscript">2</sub>】</a></h4></body></html>