<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>にしてみれば</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0789.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【にしてみたら】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0791.xhtml">【にしても】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x71890">【にしてみれば】</h1><h4 class="info">［Nにしてみれば］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>歌</rb><rt>うた</rt></ruby>がはやっているかなんて、<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>にしてみればどうでもいいことだ。それよりもっと<ruby><rb>大切</rb><rt>たい せつ</rt></ruby>なことが<ruby><rb>山</rb><rt>やま</rt></ruby>ほどある。</span>／<span class="translation">To know what song is popular now makes no difference to me at all. There are much more important things.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>長</rb><rt>なが</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>間</rb><rt>あいだ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>使</rb><rt>つか</rt></ruby>っていなかった<ruby><rb>古</rb><rt>ふる</rt></ruby>いコンピュータをあげたのだが、<ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>にしてみればとてもありがたかったらしく、<ruby><rb>何度</rb><rt>なん ど</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>何度</rb><rt>なん ど</rt></ruby>もお<ruby><rb>礼</rb><rt>れい</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>われた。</span>／<span class="translation">I gave her an old computer which I hadn’t used for a long time. For her, it seemed to be something very valuable and she thanked me again and again.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>軽</rb><rt>かる</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>気持</rb><rt>き も</rt></ruby>ちで<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はな</rt></ruby>していたのだが、あの<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>にしてみれば<ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>きな<ruby><rb>問題</rb><rt>もん だい</rt></ruby>だったのだろう。<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>落</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>ち<ruby><rb>込</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>んで<ruby><rb>誰</rb><rt>だれ</rt></ruby>とも<ruby><rb>口</rb><rt>くち</rt></ruby>をきかなくなってしまった。</span>／<span class="translation">I just mentioned it casually, but for him it was probably a major problem. He got depressed and stopped talking to anyone.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>母</rb><rt>はは</rt></ruby>にしてみれば、<ruby><rb>大切</rb><rt>たい せつ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>育</rb><rt>そだ</rt></ruby>ててきた<ruby><rb>息子</rb><rt>むすこ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>突然</rb><rt>とつ ぜん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>家</rb><rt>いえ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>ていったのだから、たいそうショックだろうが、<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>親離</rb><rt>おや ばな</rt></ruby>れしようとしている<ruby><rb>弟</rb><rt>おとうと</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>声援</rb><rt>せい えん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>送</rb><rt>おく</rt></ruby>りたい<ruby><rb>気持</rb><rt>き も</rt></ruby>ちだった。</span>／<span class="translation">For my mother, it was probably a shock to have the son she had so lovingly raised suddenly leave home, but my feeling was to support my younger brother as he tried to gain his independence from his parents.</span></div><div class="explanation">With a noun expressing a person, expresses the meaning “for that person.” Used to state that the person has a different view from others. Can be rephrased as ...にしてみたら.</div></body></html>