<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>というところだ</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0524.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【というと】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0526.xhtml">【というのは】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x49697">【というところだ】</h1><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><span class="number">A:</span>どうですか、もう<ruby><rb>仕上</rb><rt>し あ</rt></ruby>がりますか。</span>／<span class="translation">How is it going—is it finished?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>あと2、3<ruby><rb>日</rb><rt>にち</rt></ruby>というところです。</span>／<span class="translation">It will be in just two or three more days.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>先頭</rb><rt>せん とう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>選手</rb><rt>せん しゅ</rt></ruby>はゴールまであと<ruby><rb>一息</rb><rt>ひと いき</rt></ruby>というところです。</span>／<span class="translation">The leading athlete is on the final stretch to the goal.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>進度</rb><rt>しん ど</rt></ruby>はどんなものですか。</span>／<span class="translation">How is everything progressing?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span><ruby><rb>来週</rb><rt>らい しゅう</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>入門</rb><rt>にゅうもん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>段階</rb><rt>だん かい</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>終</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>わるというところです。</span>／<span class="translation">Next week I’ll be finished with the introductory level.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to explain the state of affairs of something at a certain stage. Can also be used in the form といったところだ.</div></body></html>