<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>かというと</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0128.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【がてら】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0130.xhtml">【かといえば】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x11558">【かというと】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x11560"><span class="number">1. </span>...かというと</h2><h4 class="info">［N／Na　 （なの）かというと］</h4><h4 class="info">［A／V　 （の）かというと］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>はその<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>気</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>っているそうだ。しかし<ruby><rb>自分</rb><rt>じ ぶん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>犠牲</rb><rt>ぎ せい</rt></ruby>にしてでも<ruby><rb>打</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>ち<ruby><rb>込</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>んでいるかというと、そこまでは<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>かないらしい。</span>／<span class="translation">I hear she likes her job very much. Having said that, she doesn’t seem to like it enough to sacrifice her own free time for it.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>はこの<ruby><rb>国</rb><rt>くに</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>失望</rb><rt>しつ ぼう</rt></ruby>させられた。しかし、まったく<ruby><rb>見捨</rb><rt>み す</rt></ruby>ててしまったのかというと、そうでもない。</span>／<span class="translation">I have been disappointed by this country. However, if you asked me whether or not I’ve abandoned it completely, I would say no.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>はケーキ<ruby><rb>作</rb><rt>づく</rt></ruby>りがとても<ruby><rb>上手</rb><rt>じょう ず</rt></ruby>なのだが、<ruby><rb>甘</rb><rt>あま</rt></ruby>いものが<ruby><rb>好</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>きなのかといえば、そうでもない。</span>／<span class="translation">She is very good at making cakes, but whether she likes sweet things or not is another matter. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>入社</rb><rt>にゅう しゃ</rt></ruby>して3ヶ<ruby><rb>月</rb><rt>げつ</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>会社</rb><rt>かい しゃ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>辞</rb><rt>や</rt></ruby>めてしまった。<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>や<ruby><rb>給料</rb><rt>きゅう りょう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>不満</rb><rt>ふ まん</rt></ruby>だったのかというとそういうわけではなくて、もともと<ruby><rb>大学院</rb><rt>だい がく いん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>きたかったので<ruby><rb>就職</rb><rt>しゅう しょく</rt></ruby>する<ruby><rb>気</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>はなかったのだということだった。</span>／<span class="translation">He quit his job within three months. It wasn’t that he was dissatisfied with the work or the salary, but rather that he wanted to go to graduate school and really had no intention of starting a career in the first place.</span></div><div class="explanation">When かというと is used with a negative expression in phrases such as Xかというとそうではない or Xかというとそうとは限らない, X is negated, even though X would have been the obvious outcome judging from the context of the preceding sentence. For example, in (1), because “she likes her job so much,” one might expect that “she would devote herself to her job even at the expense of her personal time,” but in reality, this is not the case. かといえば is also used.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x11601"><span class="number">2. </span><ruby><rb>疑</rb><rt>ぎ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>問</rb><rt>もん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>詞</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>+かというと</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>がきらいだ。どうしてかというと、いつも<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>悪口</rb><rt>わる ぐち</rt></ruby>ばかり<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>っているからだ。</span>／<span class="translation">I don’t like him, and if you want to know why, it’s because he’s always badmouthing people. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>一度</rb><rt>いち ど</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>海外</rb><rt>かい がい</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ったことがない。どうしてかというと、<ruby><rb>飛行機</rb><rt>ひ こう き</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>乗</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>るのが<ruby><rb>恐</rb><rt>こわ</rt></ruby>いからだ。</span>／<span class="translation">I have never been abroad. The reason I haven’t is that I’m scared of flying.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>祖父</rb><rt>そ ふ</rt></ruby>がいつごろこの<ruby><rb>家</rb><rt>いえ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>建</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>てたかというと、<ruby><rb>戦争</rb><rt>せん そう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>終</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>わってすぐの<ruby><rb>頃</rb><rt>ころ</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べるものも<ruby><rb>満足</rb><rt>まん ぞく</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>手</rb><rt>て</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>はい</rt></ruby>らないような<ruby><rb>苦労</rb><rt>く ろう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>時代</rb><rt>じ だい</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">To tell you about the time when my grandfather built this house—it was just after the war ended, and things were so bad that people couldn’t even get enough food.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>入社</rb><rt>にゅう しゃ</rt></ruby>して3ヶ<ruby><rb>月</rb><rt>げつ</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>一流</rb><rt>いち りゅう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>企業</rb><rt>き ぎょう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>退職</rb><rt>たい しょく</rt></ruby>してしまった。やめて<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なに</rt></ruby>をするかというと、インドへ<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>って<ruby><rb>仏教</rb><rt>ぶっ きょう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>修行</rb><rt>しゅ ぎょう</rt></ruby>をするらしい。</span>／<span class="translation">He’s left a leading company after three months. What he’ll do after quitting his job is to go to India and devote himself to Buddhist training.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>機械</rb><rt>き かい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>苦手</rb><rt>にが て</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>がどうやってパソコンに<ruby><rb>慣</rb><rt>な</rt></ruby>れたかというと、<ruby><rb>友達</rb><rt>とも だち</rt></ruby>とパソコンでゲームをして<ruby><rb>遊</rb><rt>あそ</rt></ruby>んでいるうちに、だんだん<ruby><rb>恐</rb><rt>こわ</rt></ruby>くなくなってきたのだ。</span>／<span class="translation">If you want to know how someone as technically challenged as I am learned how to use a PC, it’s that I gradually got over my fear by playing computer games with friends.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><span class="number">A:</span>なんで<ruby><rb>引</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby>っ<ruby><rb>越</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>すの。<ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>のアパート、<ruby><rb>家賃</rb><rt>や ちん</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>安</rb><rt>やす</rt></ruby>いし<ruby><rb>広</rb><rt>ひろ</rt></ruby>いのに。</span>／<span class="translation">Why are you moving? The apartment you live in now is reasonable and roomy.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>なんでかっていうとね、<ruby><rb>大家</rb><rt>おお や</rt></ruby>さんがうるさくて、<ruby><rb>友達</rb><rt>とも だち</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>呼</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>ぶと<ruby><rb>文句</rb><rt>もん く</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>われるし、おまけに<ruby><rb>壊</rb><rt>こわ</rt></ruby>れたところも<ruby><rb>直</rb><rt>なお</rt></ruby>してくれないのよね。</span>／<span class="translation">Well, to tell you the truth, the landlord is in my face all the time, complaining when I invite friends over, and—what’s more—he won’t repair anything that breaks down.</span></div><div class="explanation">Attaches to a question with a question word in it and is used to indicate the point of the question. The answer to the question follows. When a reason is expressed, as in (1), the sentence often ends with からだ, ためだ, or のだ. どうしてかというと and なぜかというと (both meaning “the reason being”) are idiomatic expressions. Used to explain something by asking oneself to come up with an answer. かといえば can also be used.</div></body></html>