<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>にあたって</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0741.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【に】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0743.xhtml">【にあたらない】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x69556">【にあたって】</h1><h4 class="info">［Nにあたって］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-るにあたって］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>開会</rb><rt>かい かい</rt></ruby>にあたってひとことご<ruby><rb>挨拶</rb><rt>あい さつ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>申</rb><rt>もう</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>げます。</span>／<span class="translation">On the occasion of opening this meeting, I would like to give a few words of greeting.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>年頭</rb><rt>ねん とう</rt></ruby>にあたって<ruby><rb>集会</rb><rt>しゅう かい</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>持</rb><rt>も</rt></ruby>ち、<ruby><rb>住民</rb><rt>じゅう みん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>達</rb><rt>たち</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>結束</rb><rt>けっ そく</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>揺</rb><rt>ゆ</rt></ruby>るぎないものであることを<ruby><rb>確認</rb><rt>かく にん</rt></ruby>しあった。</span>／<span class="translation">On the occasion of the New Year, we had a meeting to confirm that our solidarity as fellow residents was unshakable.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>試合</rb><rt>し あい</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>臨</rb><rt>のぞ</rt></ruby>むにあたって、<ruby><rb>相手</rb><rt>あい て</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>弱点</rb><rt>じゃく てん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>徹底的</rb><rt>てっ てい てき</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>研究</rb><rt>けん きゅう</rt></ruby>した。</span>／<span class="translation">Prior to the match, I thoroughly investigated my opponent’s weakness. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>お<ruby><rb>嬢</rb><rt>じょう</rt></ruby>さんを<ruby><rb>嫁</rb><rt>よめ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>だ</rt></ruby>すにあたってのお<ruby><rb>気持</rb><rt>き も</rt></ruby>ちはいかがでしたか。</span>／<span class="translation">How did you feel when you gave away your daughter in marriage?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>新</rb><rt>あたら</rt></ruby>しい<ruby><rb>生活</rb><rt>せい かつ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>始</rb><rt>はじ</rt></ruby>めるにあたっての<ruby><rb>資金</rb><rt>し きん</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>親</rb><rt>おや</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>援助</rb><rt>えん じょ</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>とか<ruby><rb>調達</rb><rt>ちょう たつ</rt></ruby>できた。</span>／<span class="translation">As for the expenses necessary to start my new life, I could manage to arrange for them with my parent’s support.</span></div><div class="explanation">With a noun or the dictionary form of a verb, expresses the meaning of “facing an important time which can be considered a turning point of something, someone, or some state/event.” Similar to this expression is ...にさいして. にあたって is often used as a formal expression for a speech at a ceremony or in letters of thanks. A more formal expression which can be used in place of にあたって is ...にあたり(まして). When modifying a noun, にあたって changes its form to ...にあたってのN, as shown in (4) and (5).</div></body></html>