<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>さすが</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0247.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【さしつかえない】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0249.xhtml">【させる】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x19010">【さすが】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x19012"><span class="number">1. </span>さすが</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>これ、<ruby><rb>山田</rb><rt>やま だ</rt></ruby>さんがつくったの？　うまいねえ。さすが（は）プロだねえ。</span>／<span class="translation">Did Yamada-san make this? Marvelous! Just what you’d expect from a pro.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>さすが（は）<ruby><rb>山田</rb><rt>やま だ</rt></ruby>さんだねえ。うまいねえ。</span>／<span class="translation">That’s just what I’d expect from Yamada-san. Marvelous! </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>これ<ruby><rb>山田</rb><rt>やま だ</rt></ruby>さんがつくったの？　さすがだねえ。</span>／<span class="translation">Did Yamada-san make this? Only she could do it! </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>さすが（は）<ruby><rb>世界</rb><rt>せ かい</rt></ruby>チャンピオン、その<ruby><rb>新人</rb><rt>しん じん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>対戦</rb><rt>たいせん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>相手</rb><rt>あい て</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>問題</rb><rt>もん だい</rt></ruby>にせずしりぞけた。</span>／<span class="translation">Being the world champion that he is, he defeated the rookie opponent without any difficulty. </span></div><div class="explanation">Often appears at the beginning of a sentence. Can take the form さすが(は)Nだ, as in (1), (2), and (4), or さすがだ, as in (3). Used when a result is obtained that is consistent with the speaker’s knowledge or conventional wisdom. Similar to やはり, but さすが is only used to convey positive evaluation. </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x19049"><span class="number">2. </span>さすがに</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>沖縄</rb><rt>おき なわ</rt></ruby>でもさすがに<ruby><rb>冬</rb><rt>ふゆ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>夜</rb><rt>よる</rt></ruby>はさむいね。</span>／<span class="translation">It is cold at night in winter, even in Okinawa. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>いつもはおちついている<ruby><rb>山田</rb><rt>やま だ</rt></ruby>さんだが、はじめてテレビに<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>たときはさすがに<ruby><rb>緊張</rb><rt>きん ちょう</rt></ruby>したそうだ。</span>／<span class="translation">I heard that even Yamada-san, who is usually imperturbable, got very nervous the first time he appeared on television. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>世界</rb><rt>せ かい</rt></ruby>チャンピオンもさすがにかぜには<ruby><rb>勝</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>てず、いいところなくやぶれた。</span>／<span class="translation">Even the world champion could not defeat the common cold, and she lost without doing anything remarkable.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>最近</rb><rt>さい きん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>調子</rb><rt>ちょう し</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>落</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>としている<ruby><rb>山田</rb><rt>やま だ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>選手</rb><rt>せん しゅ</rt></ruby>だが、このレベルの<ruby><rb>相手</rb><rt>あい て</rt></ruby>だとさすがにあぶなげなく<ruby><rb>勝</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>った。</span>／<span class="translation">Even though Yamada-s<i>enshu</i> (the athlete) has not been in the best condition lately, she won easily against this level of opponent. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>ふだんはそうぞうしいこどもたちも<ruby><rb>今夜</rb><rt>こん や</rt></ruby>ばかりはさすがにお<ruby><rb>通夜</rb><rt>つ や</rt></ruby>のふんいきにのまれているようだ。</span>／<span class="translation">The children, who are usually very boisterous, seem to be overwhelmed tonight by the atmosphere of the wake.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used when someone (or something) that is usually evaluated in a certain way is put into an extraordinary situation and shows a result or behavior that diverges from that evaluation. For instance, in (1), it means that Okinawa, which in Japan is evaluated as being warm, is actually not so in the situation of winter nights. Used for both positive and negative evaluation.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x19095"><span class="number">3. </span>さすが（に）...だけあって</h2><h4 class="info">［Nだけあって］</h4><h4 class="info">［Na なだけあって］</h4><h4 class="info">［A-いだけあって］</h4><h4 class="info">［Vだけあって］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>さすがプロだけあって、アマチュア<ruby><rb>選手</rb><rt>せん しゅ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>問題</rb><rt>もん だい</rt></ruby>にせず<ruby><rb>勝</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>った。</span>／<span class="translation">Being the pro that he is, he beat the amateur player without any problem.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>さすがに<ruby><rb>熱心</rb><rt>ねっ しん</rt></ruby>なだけあって、<ruby><rb>山田</rb><rt>やま だ</rt></ruby>さんのテニスはたいしたもんだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Just as you might expect from her enthusiasm, Yamada-san’s tennis is extraordinary. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>さすがからだが<ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>きいだけあって、<ruby><rb>山田</rb><rt>やま だ</rt></ruby>さんは<ruby><rb>力</rb><rt>ちから</rt></ruby>があるねえ。</span>／<span class="translation">As might be expected of a big person like him, Yamada-san has a lot of power, doesn’t he. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>山田</rb><rt>やま だ</rt></ruby>さんは、さすがによく<ruby><rb>勉強</rb><rt>べん きょう</rt></ruby>しているだけあって、この<ruby><rb>前</rb><rt>まえ</rt></ruby>のテストでもいい<ruby><rb>成績</rb><rt>せい せき</rt></ruby>だった。</span>／<span class="translation">Yamada-san got a good mark on the last test too, as might be expected from the fact that she studies so hard.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>は、さすがに 10 <ruby><rb>年</rb><rt>ねん</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>組合</rb><rt>くみ あい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>活動</rb><rt>かつ どう</rt></ruby>をしているだけあって、なにごとも<ruby><rb>民主的</rb><rt>みん しゅ てき</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>考</rb><rt>かんが</rt></ruby>えることのできる<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">As you might anticipate from her being an active union member for ten years, she is a person who can think democratically about everything. </span></div><div class="explanation">Used to say that an outcome is as expected, based on conventional wisdom or the speaker’s knowledge of a person or thing. Although it is similar to やはり in meaning, さすがに...だけあって is used only for positive evaluation.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x19146"><span class="number">4. </span>さすがに...だけのことはある</h2><h4 class="info">［Nだけのことはある］</h4><h4 class="info">［Na なだけのことはある］</h4><h4 class="info">［A-いだけのことはある］</h4><h4 class="info">［Vだけのことはある］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>アマチュア<ruby><rb>選手</rb><rt>せん しゅ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>相手</rb><rt>あい て</rt></ruby>なら<ruby><rb>問題</rb><rt>もん だい</rt></ruby>にしないね。さすがにプロだけのことはあるよ。</span>／<span class="translation">If the challengers are amateur players, he won’t care about it. They don’t call him a pro for nothing!</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>山田</rb><rt>やま だ</rt></ruby>さんのテニスはたいしたもんだ。さすがに<ruby><rb>熱心</rb><rt>ねっ しん</rt></ruby>なだけのことはあるよ。</span>／<span class="translation">Yamada-san’s tennis deserves admiration. It’s just as we might expect from her dedication.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>山田</rb><rt>やま だ</rt></ruby>さんはちからがあるねえ。さすがにからだがおおきいだけのことはある。</span>／<span class="translation">How powerful Yamada-san is! It’s just as might be expected from his large build. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>山田</rb><rt>やま だ</rt></ruby>さんはこの<ruby><rb>前</rb><rt>まえ</rt></ruby>のテストでもいい<ruby><rb>成績</rb><rt>せい せき</rt></ruby>だった。さすがによく<ruby><rb>勉強</rb><rt>べん きょう</rt></ruby>しているだけのことはあるね。</span>／<span class="translation">Yamada-san got a good grade on the last test too. It’s just as you might expect from her studying so hard. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>はなにごとも<ruby><rb>民主的</rb><rt>みん しゅ てき</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>考</rb><rt>かんが</rt></ruby>えることのできる<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>だ。さすがに20 <ruby><rb>年</rb><rt>ねん</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>組合</rb><rt>くみ あい</rt></ruby>のリーダーをやっているだけのことはある。</span>／<span class="translation">She is a person who can think democratically about everything. It’s just what you’d expect of someone who has been a union leader for more than twenty years. </span></div><div class="explanation">Used to look at a certain result or situation and then find the cause or reason for it, using the speaker’s knowledge or conventional wisdom. Similar to やはり, but さすがに...だけのことはある is used only for positive evaluation. Can be combined with さすがに...だけあって to create the form さすがに...だけのことはあって. </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x19197"><span class="number">5. </span>さすがのNも</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>さすがの<ruby><rb>世界</rb><rt>せ かい</rt></ruby>チャンピオンもケガには<ruby><rb>勝</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>てなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">World champion though she is, she couldn’t beat an injury. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>さすがの<ruby><rb>山田</rb><rt>やま だ</rt></ruby>さんも、はじめてテレビに<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>たときは<ruby><rb>緊張</rb><rt>きん ちょう</rt></ruby>したそうだ。</span>／<span class="translation">I heard that even Yamada-san (who is always very calm) got nervous when he appeared on television for the first time. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>さすがの<ruby><rb>機動隊</rb><rt>き どう たい</rt></ruby>も、ひとびとのからだをはった<ruby><rb>抵抗</rb><rt>てい こう</rt></ruby>にたいしては、それ<ruby><rb>以上</rb><rt>い じょう</rt></ruby>まえにすすむことができなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">Even the riot police (who are used to dealing with situations like this) couldn’t advance any further against the resistance of people who were laying their lives on the line. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>小</rb><rt>ちい</rt></ruby>さいころよくいじめられるこどもだった。しかし、さすがのよわむしもおとうとやいもうとがいじめられているときだけは<ruby><rb>相手</rb><rt>あい て</rt></ruby>にとびかかっていったそうだ。</span>／<span class="translation">When I was a child, I was frequently bullied. However, people say that, wimp though I was, I would throw myself fiercely at the antagonist whenever my younger brother or sister was being bullied.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used when someone or something that is usually evaluated in a certain way is put into a particular situation and then shows a result or behavior that diverges from that evaluation. Has basically the same function as さすがに, which is used like an adverb.</div></body></html>