<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>どころ</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0577.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ところ<sub class="variation">2</sub>】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0579.xhtml">【ところが】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x54366">【どころ】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x54368"><span class="number">1. </span>...どころか</h2><h4 class="info">［N／Na（な）　どころか］</h4><h4 class="info">［A-いどころか］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-るどころか］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>病気</rb><rt>びょう き</rt></ruby>どころか、ぴんぴんしている。</span>／<span class="translation">We thought she was sick, but there she was in the pink of health!</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><span class="number">A:</span>あの<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>、まだ<ruby><rb>独身</rb><rt>どく しん</rt></ruby>でしょう。</span>／<span class="translation">That person is still single, right?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span><ruby><rb>独身</rb><rt>どく しん</rt></ruby>どころか、<ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>が3<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>にん</rt></ruby>もいますよ。</span>／<span class="translation">Far from it! He has three children, you know!</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>静</rb><rt>しず</rt></ruby>かなどころか、すごいおしゃべりだ。</span>／<span class="translation">She’s hardly the quiet type—she talks nonstop!</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><span class="number">A:</span>そちらは<ruby><rb>涼</rb><rt>すず</rt></ruby>しくなりましたか。</span>／<span class="translation">Has it cooled off where you are?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span><ruby><rb>涼</rb><rt>すず</rt></ruby>しいどころか、<ruby><rb>連日</rb><rt>れん じつ</rt></ruby> 30 <ruby><rb>度</rb><rt>ど</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>越</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>える<ruby><rb>暑</rb><rt>あつ</rt></ruby>さが<ruby><rb>続</rb><rt>つづ</rt></ruby>いていますよ。</span>／<span class="translation">Just the opposite! It isn't cool at all—the heat continues day after day, with temperatures over thirty degrees!</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>風雨</rb><rt>ふう う</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>弱</rb><rt>よわ</rt></ruby>まるどころか、ますます<ruby><rb>激</rb><rt>はげ</rt></ruby>しくなる<ruby><rb>一方</rb><rt>いっ ぽう</rt></ruby>だった。</span>／<span class="translation">The wind and rain did not abate but, on the contrary, continued to increase in intensity. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span>この<ruby><rb>夏休</rb><rt>なつ やす</rt></ruby>みはゆっくり<ruby><rb>休</rb><rt>やす</rt></ruby>むどころか、<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>追</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>われどおしだった。</span>／<span class="translation">This summer vacation has been anything but relaxing—I’ve been swamped with work the whole time!</span></div><div class="explanation">Attaches to nouns, adjectives, etc. When used with <i>na-</i>adjectives, as in (3), the <i>na</i> is sometimes inserted, but it can also be omitted. The fact stated after どころか is the exact opposite of what was stated before it. Used to state a fact that completely overturns the anticipations or expectations of the speaker or listener. </div><div class="explanation">In (2), for example, Speaker B doesn’t just say “No, <span class="noSeparate">s/he</span> isn’t” in response to Speaker A’s assumption that the person in question “is single”; instead, Speaker B tells Speaker A that the person actually “has three children,” with the effect of thoroughly refuting Speaker A’s original assumption.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x54462"><span class="number">2. </span>...どころか...ない</h2><h4 class="info">［...どころか...さえ（も）...ない］</h4><h4 class="info">［...どころか...も...ない］</h4><h4 class="info">［...どころか...だって...ない］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>最近</rb><rt>さい きん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>大学生</rb><rt>だい がく せい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>中</rb><rt>なか</rt></ruby>には、<ruby><rb>英語</rb><rt>えい ご</rt></ruby>どころか<ruby><rb>日本語</rb><rt>に ほん ご</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>文章</rb><rt>ぶん しょう</rt></ruby>さえもうまく<ruby><rb>書</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>けない<ruby><rb>者</rb><rt>もの</rt></ruby>がいる。</span>／<span class="translation">These days there are some college students who can’t even write well in Japanese, let alone English! </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>旅行先</rb><rt>りょ こう さき</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>熱</rb><rt>ねつ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>だ</rt></ruby>してしまい、<ruby><rb>見物</rb><rt>けん ぶつ</rt></ruby>どころか、<ruby><rb>温泉</rb><rt>おん せん</rt></ruby>にも<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>はい</rt></ruby>れなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">I came down with a fever on the trip, so I never even got to bathe in the hot spring, let alone go sightseeing!</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>家</rb><rt>いえ</rt></ruby>まで<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ったが、<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はなし</rt></ruby>をするどころか<ruby><rb>姿</rb><rt>すがた</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>せてくれなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">I went all the way to her house, but she wouldn’t even come to the door, let alone speak to me.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>今夜</rb><rt>こん や</rt></ruby>お<ruby><rb>暇</rb><rt>ひま</rt></ruby>ですか。</span>／<span class="translation">Do you have some free time this evening?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span><ruby><rb>暇</rb><rt>ひま</rt></ruby>などころか、<ruby><rb>食事</rb><rt>しょく じ</rt></ruby>をする<ruby><rb>暇</rb><rt>ひま</rt></ruby>さえありませんよ。</span>／<span class="translation">Free time? I don’t even have time to eat supper!</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>お<ruby><rb>前</rb><rt>まえ</rt></ruby>のような<ruby><rb>奴</rb><rt>やつ</rt></ruby>には、1<ruby><rb>万円</rb><rt>まん えん</rt></ruby>どころか1<ruby><rb>円</rb><rt>えん</rt></ruby>だって<ruby><rb>貸</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>してやる<ruby><rb>気</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>はない。</span>／<span class="translation">I wouldn’t lend one yen to someone like you, let alone 10,000 yen!</span></div><div class="explanation">The meaning and conjunctive use of this expression correspond to those of 1 (see above). どころか is followed by expressions of negation such as さえ(も)...ない, も...ない, and だって...ない to express not only that the average standard or expectation will not be met, but also that one far easier or far lower will not be met, either. </div><div class="explanation">(1), for instance, means that although it is generally expected that Japanese university students should have the ability to use English as a foreign language, some students have such a severe lack of writing ability that they cannot even write properly in Japanese, which should be easier for them than English. </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x54532"><span class="number">3. </span>...どころではない</h2><h4 class="info">［Nどころではない］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-ているどころではない］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>この1か<ruby><rb>月</rb><rt>げつ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>来客</rb><rt>らい きゃく</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>続</rb><rt>つづ</rt></ruby>き、<ruby><rb>勉強</rb><rt>べん きょう</rt></ruby>どころではなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">I’ve had a string of visitors this past month, so I haven’t done much studying. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>こう<ruby><rb>天気</rb><rt>てん き</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>悪</rb><rt>わる</rt></ruby>くては<ruby><rb>海水浴</rb><rt>かい すい よく</rt></ruby>どころではない。</span>／<span class="translation">This kind of bad weather puts a stop to any swimming in the sea. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>残</rb><rt>のこ</rt></ruby>っていて、<ruby><rb>酒</rb><rt>さけ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>飲</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>んでいるどころではないんです。</span>／<span class="translation">I still have work to do, so this is hardly the time to go drinking. </span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>今晩</rb><rt>こん ばん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>一杯</rb><rt>いっ ぱい</rt></ruby>いかがですか。</span>／<span class="translation">How about getting together for a drink tonight?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span><ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>がたまっていて、それどころではないんです。</span>／<span class="translation">I have a pile of work to do, so that’s out of the question. </span></div><div class="explanation">Attaches to verbs and action nouns to convey the meaning that “this is not a situation or case in which such-and-such can be done.” As in (4), sometimes a demonstrative like それ (that) is used to refer to the previous utterance. Example (4) could be paraphrased as 酒を飲んでいるどころではない, which means “This is not a time to go drinking.” </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x54585"><span class="number">4. </span>Nどころのはなしではない</h2><h3 class="subsubtitle" id="idparagraphx1x54588"><span class="number"></span>Nどころのさわぎではない</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>受験生</rb><rt>じゅ けん せい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>息子</rb><rt>むすこ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>二人</rb><rt>ふたり</rt></ruby>もかかえ<ruby><rb>海外旅行</rb><rt>かい がい りょ こう</rt></ruby>どころの<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はなし</rt></ruby>ではありません。</span>／<span class="translation">With two sons studying for entrance exams, the last thing we should be talking about is an overseas trip.  </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>こう<ruby><rb>忙</rb><rt>いそが</rt></ruby>しくてはのんびり<ruby><rb>釣</rb><rt>つ</rt></ruby>りどころの<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はなし</rt></ruby>ではない。</span>／<span class="translation">As busy as I am right now, this is no time to talk about taking it easy and going fishing!</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>原子力</rb><rt>げん し りょく</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>発電所</rb><rt>はつでんしょ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>事故</rb><rt>じ こ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>発生</rb><rt>はっ せい</rt></ruby>でバカンスどころのさわぎではなくなった。</span>／<span class="translation">The accident at the nuclear power plant put an end to any talk of a vacation. </span></div><div class="explanation">Used with nouns or action nouns and has essentially the same meaning as Usage 3 above. Implies that “this is no time to be making irresponsible comments like that!”</div></body></html>