<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>すなわち</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0296.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ずとも】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0298.xhtml">【ずに】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x22944">【すなわち】</h1><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は、1945 <ruby><rb>年</rb><rt>ねん</rt></ruby>、すなわち、<ruby><rb>第二次</rb><rt>だい に じ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>世界</rb><rt>せ かい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>大戦</rb><rt>たいせん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>終</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>わった<ruby><rb>年</rb><rt>とし</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>生</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>まれた。</span>／<span class="translation">He was born in 1945, that is, the year that World War II ended. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>この<ruby><rb>絵</rb><rt>え</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>父</rb><rt>ちち</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>母親</rb><rt>はは おや</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>父</rb><rt>ちち</rt></ruby>、すなわち<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>曾祖父</rb><rt>そう そ ふ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>描</rb><rt>えが</rt></ruby>いたものである。</span>／<span class="translation">This picture was drawn by the father of my father’s mother, that is, my great-grandfather.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>生</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>まれによる<ruby><rb>差別</rb><rt>さ べつ</rt></ruby>、すなわち、だれの<ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>であるかということによる<ruby><rb>社会的</rb><rt>しゃ かい てき</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>差別</rb><rt>さ べつ</rt></ruby>は、どこの<ruby><rb>社会</rb><rt>しゃ かい</rt></ruby>にも<ruby><rb>存在</rb><rt>そん ざい</rt></ruby>する。</span>／<span class="translation">Discrimination based on birth, in other words, social discrimination according to who your parents are, exists in any society. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>敬語</rb><rt>けい ご</rt></ruby>とは<ruby><rb>人間</rb><rt>にん げん</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>人間</rb><rt>にん げん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>関係</rb><rt>かん けい</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>使</rb><rt>つか</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>分</rb><rt>わ</rt></ruby>けることばである。すなわち、<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はな</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>手</rb><rt>て</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>聞</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>手</rb><rt>て</rt></ruby>、および<ruby><rb>第三者</rb><rt>だい さん しゃ</rt></ruby>との<ruby><rb>相互</rb><rt>そう ご</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>関係</rb><rt>かん けい</rt></ruby>によっていろいろに<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>分</rb><rt>わ</rt></ruby>ける、その<ruby><rb>言葉</rb><rt>こと ば</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>使</rb><rt>つか</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>分</rb><rt>わ</rt></ruby>けである。</span>／<span class="translation">Honorific language involves the use of different language for different human relationships. That is, people choose the appropriate kind of language according to the interrelations among the speaker, the listener, and third parties; it’s the adjustment of language to suit the relationships at hand.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used after a word, phrase, or sentence to signal that a paraphrase of its meaning and content will follow. The paraphrase expresses the preceding word or phrase more plainly, or conveys concrete examples, additional explanation, etc. Used in formal, written language such as academic papers, lectures, and talks. In spoken language, つまり is used more often. </div></body></html>