<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>でなくてなんだろう</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0469.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【てでも】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0471.xhtml">【でなくては】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x42265">【でなくてなんだろう】</h1><h4 class="info">［Nでなくてなんだろう］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>のためなら<ruby><rb>死</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>んでもいいとまで<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>う。これが<ruby><rb>愛</rb><rt>あい</rt></ruby>でなくて<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>だろう。</span>／<span class="translation">I thought I was ready to die for her. If this wasn’t love, what was?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>出会</rb><rt>で あ</rt></ruby>ったときから<ruby><rb>二人</rb><rt>ふたり</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>人生</rb><rt>じん せい</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>破滅</rb><rt>は めつ</rt></ruby>へ<ruby><rb>向</rb><rt>む</rt></ruby>かって<ruby><rb>進</rb><rt>すす</rt></ruby>んでいった。これが<ruby><rb>宿命</rb><rt>しゅく めい</rt></ruby>でなくて<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>だろうか。</span>／<span class="translation">From the moment the two met, their lives headed toward disaster.  What could this be other than fate?</span></div><div class="explanation">Attaches to nouns such as 愛 (love), 宿命 (fate), 運命 (destiny), 真実 (truth), and so on, to emphasize that this is what something is (...である). Generally used in novels or personal essays.</div></body></html>