<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>にたいして</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0799.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【にそって】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0801.xhtml">【にたいする】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x72365">【にたいして】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x72367"><span class="number">1. </span>...にたいして</h2><h4 class="info">［Nにたいして］</h4><h4 class="info">［Naなのにたいして］</h4><h4 class="info">［A-いのにたいして］</h4><h4 class="info">［Vのにたいして］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>発言</rb><rt>はつ げん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>対</rb><rt>たい</rt></ruby>して<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>猛烈</rb><rt>もう れつ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>攻撃</rb><rt>こう げき</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>加</rb><rt>くわ</rt></ruby>えてきた。</span>／<span class="translation">He criticized me aggressively about my remarks.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>質問</rb><rt>しつ もん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>対</rb><rt>たい</rt></ruby>して<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なに</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>答</rb><rt>こた</rt></ruby>えてくれなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">I didn’t get any answer to my questions.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>女性</rb><rt>じょ せい</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>対</rb><rt>たい</rt></ruby>しては<ruby><rb>親切</rb><rt>しん せつ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>指導</rb><rt>し どう</rt></ruby>してくれる。</span>／<span class="translation">With women, he offers kind guidance.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>現在</rb><rt>げん ざい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>容疑者</rb><rt>よう ぎ しゃ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>対</rb><rt>たい</rt></ruby>しての<ruby><rb>取</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>り<ruby><rb>調</rb><rt>しら</rt></ruby>べが<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>おこな</rt></ruby>われているところです。</span>／<span class="translation">The interrogation of the suspect is underway at the moment.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>手</rb><rt>て</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>振</rb><rt>ふ</rt></ruby>って<ruby><rb>合図</rb><rt>あい ず</rt></ruby>したのに<ruby><rb>対</rb><rt>たい</rt></ruby>して、<ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>きく<ruby><rb>腕</rb><rt>うで</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>振</rb><rt>ふ</rt></ruby>って<ruby><rb>応</rb><rt>こた</rt></ruby>えてくれた。</span>／<span class="translation">When I waved my hand to her to give a sign, she responded to me by giving me a big wave.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses the meaning of “toward a thing/state/event, responding to a thing/state/event,” and is followed by some expression indicating some kind of motion such as an action or attitude toward the thing/state/event. When modifying a noun, becomes ...にたいしてのN or ...にたいするN.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x72418"><span class="number">2. </span>N+<ruby><rb>数</rb><rt>すう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>量</rb><rt>りょう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>詞</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>+にたいして</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>研究員</rb><rt>けん きゅう いん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>1人</rb><rt>ひとり</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>対</rb><rt>たい</rt></ruby>して<ruby><rb>年間</rb><rt>ねん かん</rt></ruby> 40<ruby><rb>万</rb><rt>まん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>円</rb><rt>えん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>補助金</rb><rt>ほ じょ きん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>与</rb><rt>あた</rt></ruby>えられる。</span>／<span class="translation">400,000 yen is allocated to each researcher as an annual subsidy.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>学生</rb><rt>がく せい</rt></ruby> 20 <ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>にん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>対</rb><rt>たい</rt></ruby>して<ruby><rb>教員</rb><rt>きょう いん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>一人</rb><rt>ひとり</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>配置</rb><rt>はい ち</rt></ruby>されている。</span>／<span class="translation">For every twenty students, one teacher is assigned. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>砂</rb><rt>すな</rt></ruby>3に<ruby><rb>対</rb><rt>たい</rt></ruby>して1の<ruby><rb>割合</rb><rt>わり あい</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>土</rb><rt>つち</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>混</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>ぜます。</span>／<span class="translation">Sand is mixed with soil in a ratio of three to one.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>学生</rb><rt>がく せい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>1人</rb><rt>ひとり</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>対</rb><rt>たい</rt></ruby>して 20 <ruby><rb>平米</rb><rt>へい べい</rt></ruby>のスペースが<ruby><rb>確保</rb><rt>かく ほ</rt></ruby>されている。</span>／<span class="translation">A space of twenty square meters is reserved for each student.</span></div><div class="explanation">With a numbered unit expressed in quantity or size, expresses the meaning of “according to some unit.” Can be rephrased as ...について or ...につき.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x72455"><span class="number">3. </span>...のにたいして</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>自民党</rb><rt>じ みん とう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>支持</rb><rt>し じ</rt></ruby>しているのに<ruby><rb>対</rb><rt>たい</rt></ruby>して、<ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>共産党</rb><rt>きょう さん とう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>支援</rb><rt>し えん</rt></ruby>している。</span>／<span class="translation">He supports the Liberal Democratic Party, whereas she supports the Communist Party. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>兄</rb><rt>あに</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>背</rb><rt>せ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>高</rb><rt>たか</rt></ruby>いのに<ruby><rb>対</rb><rt>たい</rt></ruby>して、<ruby><rb>弟</rb><rt>おとうと</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>ほう</rt></ruby>はクラスで<ruby><rb>一番</rb><rt>いち ばん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>低</rb><rt>ひく</rt></ruby>い。</span>／<span class="translation">Although the elder brother is tall, the younger brother is the shortest in his class.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to juxtapose two items in contrast.</div></body></html>