<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>としても</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0588.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【としては】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0590.xhtml">【とする<sub class="variation">1</sub>】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x55957">【としても】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x55959"><span class="number">1. </span>Nとしても<span class="reference">→<a href="part0586.xhtml#idsubtitlex1x55731">【として】3</a></span></h2><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x55967"><span class="number">2. </span>...としても</h2><h4 class="info">［N／Na　（だ）としても］</h4><h4 class="info">［A／V　としても］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>っていることが<ruby><rb>真実</rb><rt>しん じつ</rt></ruby>だとしても、<ruby><rb>証拠</rb><rt>しょう こ</rt></ruby>がなければ<ruby><rb>信</rb><rt>しん</rt></ruby>じるわけにはいかない。</span>／<span class="translation">Even if what he says is true, I can’t very well believe it without proof.  </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>たとえ<ruby><rb>賛成</rb><rt>さん せい</rt></ruby>してくれる<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>一人</rb><rt>ひとり</rt></ruby>もいないとしても、<ruby><rb>自分</rb><rt>じ ぶん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>意見</rb><rt>い けん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>最後</rb><rt>さい ご</rt></ruby>まで<ruby><rb>主張</rb><rt>しゅ ちょう</rt></ruby>するつもりだ。</span>／<span class="translation">I intend to stick with my opinion to the very end, even if there isn't a single person who concurs with it. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>留学</rb><rt>りゅう がく</rt></ruby>するとしても、<ruby><rb>来年</rb><rt>らい ねん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>以降</rb><rt>い こう</rt></ruby>です。</span>／<span class="translation">If I do study overseas, it will have to be next year or later.  </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>からタクシーに<ruby><rb>乗</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>ったとしても、<ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>間</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>合</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>いそうもない。</span>／<span class="translation">Even if we took a taxi at this point, it’s not very likely we would make it in time.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>渋滞</rb><rt>じゅう たい</rt></ruby>でバスが<ruby><rb>遅</rb><rt>おく</rt></ruby>れたとしても、<ruby><rb>電話</rb><rt>でん わ</rt></ruby>ぐらいしてくるはずだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Even if the bus was delayed in traffic, I would at least expect a phone call.  </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>加藤</rb><rt>か とう</rt></ruby>さんの<ruby><rb>忠</rb><rt>ちゅう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>告</rb><rt>こく</rt></ruby>がなかったとしても、やっぱり<ruby><rb>病院</rb><rt>びょう いん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>変</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>えていただろう。</span>／<span class="translation">Even if Kato-san hadn’t warned me, I would probably have changed hospitals anyway. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（7）</span><ruby><rb>同級生</rb><rt>どう きゅう せい</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>駅</rb><rt>えき</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>出会</rb><rt>で あ</rt></ruby>わなかったとしても、やっぱり<ruby><rb>授業</rb><rt>じゅ ぎょう</rt></ruby>をさぼって<ruby><rb>映画</rb><rt>えい が</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>っただろう。</span>／<span class="translation">Even if I hadn’t run into a classmate at the station, I probably still would have cut class to go see a movie.  </span></div><div class="explanation">Takes the pattern XとしてもY (even if X, then Y). Expresses that “even if X were true/had happened, it would not have caused or hindered the occurrence of Y.” Y expresses something that contradicts or deviates from what is expected from X. </div><div class="explanation">When X is a verb, the pattern V-たとしても (<i>ta-</i>form) is the most common, as shown in (4)-(7). However, the pattern V-るとしても (dictionary form) is also used, as shown in (3). (3) means “if something like studying abroad happens in the future,” and the time frame indicated by Y is essentially the same as that for the occurrence of X. On the other hand, V-たとしても means “even if/when situation X has arisen,” so this pattern expresses that X occurs before Y. For example, (4) means “even if we do take a taxi, the end result will probably still be that we won’t make it in time.”</div><div class="explanation">In (6) and (7), X expresses a situation that is contrary to fact, and Y expresses a result that probably would have happened anyway: “In fact, Kato-san did warn me, but even if <span class="noSeparate">s/he</span> hadn’t...” and “I did actually run into a classmate, but even if I hadn’t....” </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x56048"><span class="number">3. </span>...はいいとしても</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>はいいとしても、<ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>許</rb><rt>ゆる</rt></ruby>してくれないだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">Even if he’s OK with it, she probably won’t allow it. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>計算</rb><rt>けい さん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>間違</rb><rt>ま ちが</rt></ruby>えたのはいいとしても、すぐに<ruby><rb>報告</rb><rt>ほう こく</rt></ruby>しなかったことが<ruby><rb>問題</rb><rt>もん だい</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">Even if we overlook the miscalculation, the fact that you didn't report it right away is a problem.  </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>通</rb><rt>どお</rt></ruby>り<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>たのはいいとしても、<ruby><rb>宿題</rb><rt>しゅく だい</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>忘</rb><rt>わす</rt></ruby>れて<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>たのはよくない。</span>／<span class="translation">You may have come on time, but it's not acceptable that you forgot to bring your homework. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>あのホテルは、<ruby><rb>部屋</rb><rt>へ や</rt></ruby>はいいとしても、<ruby><rb>従業員</rb><rt>じゅう ぎょう いん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>態度</rb><rt>たい ど</rt></ruby>がよくない。</span>／<span class="translation">The rooms at that hotel might be all right, but the employees don’t have a very good attitude. </span></div><div class="explanation">Placed after nouns and clauses. Takes the pattern XはいいとしてもY (even if I accept X, still Y). Y contains an expression of negative evaluation, such as よくない (not good), and the pattern as a whole means “even if I consider X to be all right, I cannot say the same about Y.” This expression is used to contrast two situations, X and Y. It means that while X lies within the range of what is permissible, Y does not.  </div></body></html>