<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>そうしたら</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0321.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【そういえば】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0323.xhtml">【そうして】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x25197">【そうしたら】</h1><div class="explanation">Used to connect two sentences in chronological sequence. そしたら is a more informal equivalent.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x25212"><span class="number">1. </span>そうしたら〈future〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>娘</rb><rt>むすめ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>大学</rb><rt>だい がく</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>はい</rt></ruby>ったら<ruby><rb>下宿</rb><rt>げ しゅく</rt></ruby>すると<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>っている。そうしたら、<ruby><rb>家</rb><rt>いえ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>中</rb><rt>なか</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>静</rb><rt>しず</rt></ruby>かになるだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">My daughter says she’s going to rent a room in a boarding house when she goes to college. Then our house will be quiet, I suppose.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>ここには<ruby><rb>木</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>植</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>えて、ベンチを<ruby><rb>置</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>こう。そうしたら、いい<ruby><rb>憩</rb><rt>いこ</rt></ruby>いの<ruby><rb>場所</rb><rt>ば しょ</rt></ruby>ができるだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">Let’s plant a tree here and put a bench by it. If we do that, it’ll make a nice place to take a rest.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>店</rb><rt>みせ</rt></ruby>はもうすぐ<ruby><rb>開店</rb><rt>かい てん</rt></ruby>するらしい。そうしたら、わたしも<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ってみよう。</span>／<span class="translation">Apparently his shop will be opening soon. When it does, I think I’ll go and see it too.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>毎日</rb><rt>まい にち</rt></ruby>30<ruby><rb>分</rb><rt>ぷん</rt></ruby>だけ<ruby><rb>練習</rb><rt>れん しゅう</rt></ruby>しなさい。そうしたら<ruby><rb>見違</rb><rt>み ちが</rt></ruby>えるほど<ruby><rb>上達</rb><rt>じょう たつ</rt></ruby>するでしょう。</span>／<span class="translation">Practice for just thirty minutes every day. If you do that, you’ll improve so much that people will think you’re a different person.</span></div><div class="explanation">Follows a sentence describing some kind of plan, etc. and indicates the future result of such a plan.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x25252"><span class="number">2. </span>そうしたら〈past〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>暑</rb><rt>あつ</rt></ruby>いので<ruby><rb>窓</rb><rt>まど</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>開</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>けた。そうしたら<ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>きなガが<ruby><rb>飛</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>び<ruby><rb>込</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>んで<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>た。</span>／<span class="translation">It was hot, so I opened the window. When I did, a big moth flew in.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>忘</rb><rt>わす</rt></ruby>れ<ruby><rb>物</rb><rt>もの</rt></ruby>をとりに<ruby><rb>夕方</rb><rt>ゆう がた</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>学校</rb><rt>がっ こう</rt></ruby>へ<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>った。そうしたらもう<ruby><rb>正門</rb><rt>せい もん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>閉</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>まっていた。</span>／<span class="translation">I went back to the school in the evening to pick up something I’d forgotten. When I got there, the front gate was already shut.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>ふらっとデパートに<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>はい</rt></ruby>ってみた。そうしたらちょうどバーゲンセールをしていた。</span>／<span class="translation">I happened to pop into a department store and found it was having a sale.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>前</rb><rt>まえ</rt></ruby>にはだぶだぶだったズボンをはいてみた。そうしたらちょうどいい<ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>きさになっていた。</span>／<span class="translation">I tried on some pants that used to be very baggy and found that they were now just the right size.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>試験</rb><rt>し けん</rt></ruby>のあと、<ruby><rb>参考書</rb><rt>さん こう しょ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>開</rb><rt>ひら</rt></ruby>いてみた。そうしたら、<ruby><rb>全</rb><rt>まった</rt></ruby>く<ruby><rb>同</rb><rt>おな</rt></ruby>じ<ruby><rb>問題</rb><rt>もん だい</rt></ruby>がのっていた。</span>／<span class="translation">After the exam, I opened my reference book, just to find that it had exactly the same question in it.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to describe a past event that took place as the result of another event or act. Often used to describe a new discovery. Unlike そして, そうしたらlinks what happened in the previous sentence with a situation or event that is unrelated to the speaker’s own actions or intentions, or with a new occurrence, or with the discovery of a fact. そうしたら cannot be followed by expressions indicating an intentional act. Used in casual spoken language.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>デパートへ行った。そうしたら買物をした。／I went to the department store and found that I did some shopping.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>デパートへ行った。そして買物をした。／I went to the department store and did some shopping.</div><h4 class="reference">→<a href="part0405.xhtml#idsubtitlex1x33593">【たら<sub class="Subscript">1</sub>】3</a></h4></body></html>