<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>たがる</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0372.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【だからといって】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0374.xhtml">【だけ<sub class="variation">1</sub>】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x29663">【たがる】</h1><h4 class="info">［R-たがる］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>というものはなんでも<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>りたがる。</span>／<span class="translation">Children want to know everything.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>歯医者</rb><rt>は い しゃ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>きたがらない。</span>／<span class="translation">Children don’t like going to the dentist.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>父</rb><rt>ちち</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>海外旅行</rb><rt>かい がい りょ こう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>きたがっているが、<ruby><rb>母</rb><rt>はは</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>きたくないようだ。</span>／<span class="translation">My father wants to travel abroad, but my mother doesn’t seem to want to go.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>夏</rb><rt>なつ</rt></ruby>になると、みんな<ruby><rb>冷</rb><rt>つめ</rt></ruby>たくてさっぱりしたものばかり<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べたがるが、それでは<ruby><rb>夏</rb><rt>なつ</rt></ruby>バテしてしまう。</span>／<span class="translation">When summer comes, all everybody wants to eat is cold, mildly-flavored food, but that leads to summer fatigue.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>避難</rb><rt>ひ なん</rt></ruby>している<ruby><rb>住民</rb><rt>じゅう みん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>一刻</rb><rt>いっ こく</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>早</rb><rt>はや</rt></ruby>く<ruby><rb>家</rb><rt>いえ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>帰</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>りたがっている。</span>／<span class="translation">The evacuated residents want to go home as soon as possible.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span>リーさんは<ruby><rb>留学</rb><rt>りゅう がく</rt></ruby>してまだ<ruby><rb>半年</rb><rt>はん とし</rt></ruby>だが、<ruby><rb>家族</rb><rt>か ぞく</rt></ruby>のことが<ruby><rb>心配</rb><rt>しん ぱい</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>国</rb><rt>くに</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>帰</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>りたがっている。</span>／<span class="translation">Lee-san has only been studying abroad for six months, but he wants to go home because he’s worried about his family.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（7）</span><ruby><rb>教授</rb><rt>きょう じゅ</rt></ruby>はこの<ruby><rb>実験</rb><rt>じっ けん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>大学院</rb><rt>だい がく いん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>学生</rb><rt>がく せい</rt></ruby>にさせたがっているが、<ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>のような<ruby><rb>研究</rb><rt>けん きゅう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>態勢</rb><rt>たいせい</rt></ruby>では<ruby><rb>無理</rb><rt>む り</rt></ruby>なのではないだろうか。</span>／<span class="translation">The professor wants to have graduate students do this experiment, but that may not be possible, given current trends in research.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to express the wishes or desires of a third person. Takes the form V-たがっている when a current situation is being expressed.</div><div class="explanation">When たがる is not used, indirect expressions such as たいと言っている, たいらしい, and たいそうだ are used instead. たがる is not used when the speaker says something from the perspective of a third person, as in the example below.</div><div class="explanation xtalk"><span class="type">（例）</span><span class="number">A:</span>山本さん、どうしてパーティーに来なかったんでしょう。／I wonder why Yamamoto-san didn’t come to the party.</div><div class="explanation xtalk"><span class="type"></span><span class="number">B:</span>佐野に会いたくないからだよ。／Because she doesn’t want to see Sano.</div><div class="explanation">On the other hand, たがる is used when the speaker is repeating what a third person thinks of <span class="noSeparate">him/her</span> or has said about <span class="noSeparate">him/her</span>. </div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>彼は僕が社長になりたがっていると思っているらしいが、僕はそんなつもりはまったくない。／He seems to think I want to become company president, but I have no such intention at all.</div><h4 class="reference">→<a href="part0172.xhtml#idtitlex1x13932">【がる】</a></h4></body></html>