<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>とうとう</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0548.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【とうてい...ない】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0550.xhtml">【どうにか】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x51520">【とうとう】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x51522"><span class="number">1. </span>とうとうV-た</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>夏休</rb><rt>なつ やす</rt></ruby>みもとうとう<ruby><rb>終</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>わってしまった。</span>／<span class="translation">Summer vacation has finally come to an end.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>長</rb><rt>なが</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>間</rb><rt>あいだ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>入院</rb><rt>にゅう いん</rt></ruby>していた<ruby><rb>祖父</rb><rt>そ ふ</rt></ruby>も、とうとう<ruby><rb>亡</rb><rt>な</rt></ruby>くなった。</span>／<span class="translation">After a long period of hospitalization, my grandfather finally passed away.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>卒業式</rb><rt>そつ ぎょう しき</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>無事</rb><rt>ぶ じ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>終</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>わって、とうとう<ruby><rb>国</rb><rt>くに</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>帰</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>る<ruby><rb>日</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby>になった。</span>／<span class="translation">His graduation successfully behind him, the day to return to his home country had come at last. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>20 <ruby><rb>年</rb><rt>ねん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>歳月</rb><rt>さい げつ</rt></ruby>をかけて、<ruby><rb>研究</rb><rt>けん きゅう</rt></ruby>はとうとう<ruby><rb>完成</rb><rt>かん せい</rt></ruby>した。</span>／<span class="translation">After some twenty years of effort, the research was at last completed.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>相手</rb><rt>あい て</rt></ruby>があまりにしつこいので、<ruby><rb>温厚</rb><rt>おん こう</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>もとうとう<ruby><rb>怒</rb><rt>おこ</rt></ruby>ってしまった。</span>／<span class="translation">The other person’s extreme persistence finally drove him to anger, though he was usually so easy-going.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>朝</rb><rt>あさ</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>曇</rb><rt>くも</rt></ruby>っていたが、<ruby><rb>夕方</rb><rt>ゆう がた</rt></ruby>にはとうとう<ruby><rb>雨</rb><rt>あめ</rt></ruby>になった。</span>／<span class="translation">It had been cloudy since morning, and when evening came, it finally began to rain. </span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses that something has been realized ultimately or after spending a lot of time on it. (1)-(3) indicate that a long passage of time or a process was undergone before an anticipated final stage was reached. (4) indicates that persistent effort over a long period of time has led to the final result. Implies the speaker’s deep emotion regarding the events or time leading up to the outcome.</div><div class="explanation">Also, as shown in (5) and (6), とうとう is sometimes used when a situation that was maintained for a length of time passes a certain limit. (5) means “a man who usually doesn’t get angry could no longer control his ire,” and (6) means “it had been threatening to rain since morning, and although it held off during the daytime, in the evening it started to rain.”</div><div class="explanation">Similar expressions include やっと (at long last) and ついに (finally/in the end).</div><div class="explanation">For details, refer to やっと (Usage 1).</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x51601"><span class="number">2. </span>とうとう...V-なかった</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>二時間</rb><rt>に じ かん</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>待</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>ったが、とうとう<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>なかった。</span>／<span class="translation">We waited for two hours, but in the end he never showed up.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>何週間</rb><rt>なん しゅう かん</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>捜索</rb><rt>そう さく</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>続</rb><rt>つづ</rt></ruby>けられたが、<ruby><rb>遺体</rb><rt>い たい</rt></ruby>はとうとう<ruby><rb>発見</rb><rt>はっ けん</rt></ruby>されなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">The search continued for several weeks, but ultimately the body was never found. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>全力</rb><rt>ぜん りょく</rt></ruby>をあげて<ruby><rb>調査</rb><rt>ちょう さ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>おこな</rt></ruby>われたが、<ruby><rb>事故</rb><rt>じ こ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>原因</rb><rt>げん いん</rt></ruby>はとうとう<ruby><rb>分</rb><rt>わ</rt></ruby>からなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">An all-out investigation was conducted, but the cause of the accident was never determined. </span></div><div class="explanation">Used when an anticipated situation ultimately fails to come about. The expression ついに can be used in the same way, but やっと does not take this pattern.</div></body></html>