<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>あれで</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0025.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【あるまじき...だ】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0027.xhtml">【あれでも】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x1987">【あれで】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x1992"><span class="number">1. </span>あれで〈positive evaluation〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>あの<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>はいつもきついことばかり<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>っていますが、あれでなかなか<ruby><rb>優</rb><rt>やさ</rt></ruby>しいところもあるんですよ。</span>／<span class="translation">He always says harsh things, but actually he is quite a kind person.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>体</rb><rt>からだ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>小</rb><rt>ちい</rt></ruby>さいけど、あれでけっこう<ruby><rb>体力</rb><rt>たい りょく</rt></ruby>はあるのよね。</span>／<span class="translation">Although she has a small build, she is quite strong physically. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>あのレストランって、<ruby><rb>一見</rb><rt>いっ けん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>汚</rb><rt>きたな</rt></ruby>くてまずそうに<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>えるけど、あれでなかなかいけるんですよ。</span>／<span class="translation">At first glance, that restaurant looks dirty and not so appealing, but it actually is quite nice.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used with words likeなかなか and けっこう, this expresses an evaluation of something in which there is an unexpected difference between its appearance and its true nature. The evaluation is expressed after あれで. This is used when praising the person or thing that is the topic of the sentence. </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x2026"><span class="number">2. </span>あれで〈surprise〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>あのコート、あれで4<ruby><rb>万</rb><rt>まん</rt></ruby>なら<ruby><rb>安</rb><rt>やす</rt></ruby>いものだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Forty thousand yen is very cheap for that coat.  </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>え、<ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>あれでスキー<ruby><rb>初</rb><rt>はじ</rt></ruby>めてなんですか。すごくうまいじゃないですか。</span>／<span class="translation">Is it really her first time to ski?  She is a very good skier.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>今日</rb><rt>きょう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>食堂</rb><rt>しょく どう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>定食</rb><rt>てい しょく</rt></ruby>、あれでよく<ruby><rb>改善</rb><rt>かい ぜん</rt></ruby>したって<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>えるよね。まるで<ruby><rb>豚</rb><rt>ぶた</rt></ruby>のえさだよ。</span>／<span class="translation">Today’s special at the cafeteria was food fit for pigs! How can they say that they’ve improved things? </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>あの<ruby><rb>映画</rb><rt>えい が</rt></ruby>、あれで（も）アカデミー<ruby><rb>賞</rb><rt>しょう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>授賞</rb><rt>じゅしょう</rt></ruby>してるんですか。ちょっとひどすぎると<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>いませんか。</span>／<span class="translation">Did a movie like that win an Academy Award? Don’t you think that’s awful?</span></div><div class="explanation">In these cases, あれで expresses slight surprise that a person or thing is in a certain state, has value, or can do something. This can be used for positive remarks, as in (1) and (2), or for negative remarks, as in (3) and (4).</div></body></html>