<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>おもう</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0100.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【おまけに】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0102.xhtml">【おもえば】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x8514">【おもう】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x8516"><span class="number">1. </span>...とおもう</h2><h3 class="subsubtitle" id="idsubsubtitlex1x8519"><span class="number">a. </span>...とおもう</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>今日</rb><rt>きょう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>雨</rb><rt>あめ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>降</rb><rt>ふ</rt></ruby>ると<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>います。</span>／<span class="translation">I think it’ll rain today.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>山田</rb><rt>やま だ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>先生</rb><rt>せん せい</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>ないと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>う。</span>／<span class="translation">I think Yamada-sensei won’t come.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>あの<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>のやり<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>かた</rt></ruby>はひどいと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>います。</span>／<span class="translation">I think the way he does things is awful.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ったことはうそだと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>う。</span>／<span class="translation">I feel what he said was a lie.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>確</rb><rt>たし</rt></ruby>か、<ruby><rb>机</rb><rt>つくえ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>うえ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>置</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>いたと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>う。</span>／<span class="translation">I’m sure I put it on the desk.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span>あなたには<ruby><rb>幸</rb><rt>しあわ</rt></ruby>せになってほしいと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>うから、あえてこういうきつい<ruby><rb>忠告</rb><rt>ちゅう こく</rt></ruby>をするのです。</span>／<span class="translation">I want you to be happy, so that is why I am giving you such stern advice.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（7）</span>こんな<ruby><rb>忙</rb><rt>いそが</rt></ruby>しい<ruby><rb>会社</rb><rt>かい しゃ</rt></ruby>にいつまでもいては<ruby><rb>過労死</rb><rt>か ろう し</rt></ruby>しかねないと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>って、<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>いきって<ruby><rb>転職</rb><rt>てん しょく</rt></ruby>することにした。</span>／<span class="translation">I thought there was a real chance of dying from overwork if I stayed at such a busy company, so I took the plunge and changed jobs.</span></div><div class="explanation">Follows a clause and indicates that the content of the clause is the speaker’s subjective judgment or personal opinion. When used in an interrogative sentence, its function is to ask for the listener’s personal judgment or opinion . When used in the dictionary form (と思う) or <i>masu</i>-form (と思います) as a declarative statement, the subject is always the speaker and never another person. For example, in (2) the person doing the thinking is 私 (I), not 山田先生 (Yamada-sensei). If the speaker wishes to say that the person doing the thinking is 山田さん, then use of the form 思っている is required, as in 山田さんは（田中さんが来ない）と思っている (Yamada-san thinks that (Tanaka-san will not come)). However, 思う can refer to a third person’s judgment when it is used in <i>ta</i>-form, as in the example below.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>山田さんは来ないと思った。／I thought Yamada-san wouldn’t come./Yamada-san thought (someone else) wouldn’t come.</div><div class="explanation">In this case, the original sentence can be interpreted as either “I thought Yamada-san wouldn’t come” or “Yamada-san thought (someone else) wouldn’t come.”</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x8599"><span class="number">b. </span>...とおもっている</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>自分</rb><rt>じ ぶん</rt></ruby>のしたことが<ruby><rb>正</rb><rt>ただ</rt></ruby>しいと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>っている。</span>／<span class="translation">I think what I did was right.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>イギリスに<ruby><rb>留学</rb><rt>りゅう がく</rt></ruby>してよかったと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>っている。</span>／<span class="translation">I feel that studying in the U.K. was very good for me.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>警察</rb><rt>けい さつ</rt></ruby>はあの<ruby><rb>男</rb><rt>おとこ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>犯人</rb><rt>はん にん</rt></ruby>だと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>っている。</span>／<span class="translation">The police think that man is the culprit.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>その<ruby><rb>実力</rb><rt>じつ りょく</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>合格</rb><rt>ごう かく</rt></ruby>できると<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>っているの。</span>／<span class="translation">Do you really think your ability can get you a passing grade?</span></div><div class="explanation">Follows a clause and expresses an opinion, judgment, or belief on the part of the speaker or another person. The difference between 思っている and 思う (see Usage 1a above) is that 思う is interpreted to mean that the speaker’s judgment has been made on the spot, while 思っている implies that someone has held a certain opinion or belief from some point in the past until the present. Also, 思っている can express the opinion or judgment of another person, as in (3) and (4), while 思うcannot.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x8636"><span class="number">c. </span>...とおもわれる</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>このままの<ruby><rb>状態</rb><rt>じょう たい</rt></ruby>では<ruby><rb>環境</rb><rt>かん きょう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>汚染</rb><rt>お せん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>進</rb><rt>すす</rt></ruby>む<ruby><rb>一方</rb><rt>いっ ぽう</rt></ruby>だと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>われる。</span>／<span class="translation">There is reason to believe that if things are left as they are, environmental pollution will only get worse.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>にはこのことが<ruby><rb>正</rb><rt>ただ</rt></ruby>しいとは<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>われません。</span>／<span class="translation">This doesn’t seem right to me.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “a certain judgment is formed spontaneously.” Used when stating an opinion objectively rather than arbitrarily, or for softening the impact of an assertion. Often used in academic papers, lectures, and other kinds of written language. と can be replaced by ように to form the expression ように思われる.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x8661"><span class="number">2. </span>...とはおもわなかった</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>まさか<ruby><rb>今日</rb><rt>きょう</rt></ruby>あの<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>るとは<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>わなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">I never thought that person would come today!</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>こんな<ruby><rb>街中</rb><rt>まち なか</rt></ruby>にこんな<ruby><rb>静</rb><rt>しず</rt></ruby>かな<ruby><rb>公園</rb><rt>こう えん</rt></ruby>があるとは<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>わなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">I didn’t expect there to be such a quiet park like this right in the middle of downtown.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>独身寮</rb><rt>どく しん りょう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>部屋</rb><rt>へ や</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>狭</rb><rt>せま</rt></ruby>いとは<ruby><rb>聞</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>いていたが、こんなに<ruby><rb>狭</rb><rt>せま</rt></ruby>いとは<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>わなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">I’d heard that the rooms in the singles dormitory were small, but I never imagined they would be this small.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>いつも<ruby><rb>反抗的</rb><rt>はん こう てき</rt></ruby>なお<ruby><rb>前</rb><rt>まえ</rt></ruby>がそんなに<ruby><rb>素直</rb><rt>す なお</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>謝</rb><rt>あやま</rt></ruby>るとは<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>わなかったな。</span>／<span class="translation">I never thought that someone as contrary as you would apologize so sincerely.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>引</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby>っ<ruby><rb>越</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>先</rb><rt>さき</rt></ruby>のおとなりが<ruby><rb>田中</rb><rt>た なか</rt></ruby>さんだなんて<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>ってもみませんでしたよ。<ruby><rb>奇遇</rb><rt>き ぐう</rt></ruby>ですね。</span>／<span class="translation">I never imagined that I was moving in next to you, Tanaka-san. What a coincidence!</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>いや、ぼくも<ruby><rb>隣</rb><rt>となり</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>越</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>してくるのが<ruby><rb>君</rb><rt>きみ</rt></ruby>だとは<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>わなかったよ。</span>／<span class="translation">Well, I never thought you were the person moving in next door either!</span></div><div class="explanation">Means that the speaker views a situation or event as completely unexpected. Usually implies a feeling of surprise.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x8716"><span class="number">3. </span>R-たいとおもう</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>アメリカに<ruby><rb>留学</rb><rt>りゅう がく</rt></ruby>したいと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>います。</span>／<span class="translation">I want to go to the U.S. to study.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>結婚式</rb><rt>けっ こん しき</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>是非</rb><rt>ぜ ひ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>参加</rb><rt>さん か</rt></ruby>したいと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>っております。</span>／<span class="translation">I’d very much like to attend your wedding ceremony.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>一流</rb><rt>いち りゅう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>会社</rb><rt>がい しゃ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>就職</rb><rt>しゅう しょく</rt></ruby>したいと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>っている。</span>／<span class="translation">I’d like to work for a top-ranked company.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>では、ご<ruby><rb>一緒</rb><rt>いっ しょ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>乾杯</rb><rt>かん ぱい</rt></ruby>をしたいと<ruby><rb>存</rb><rt>ぞん</rt></ruby>じます。</span>／<span class="translation">I would now like to ask you all to join me in a toast.</span></div><div class="explanation">思う is combined with ...たい, which expresses a wish or desire on the part of the speaker, to soften the directness of the ...たい expression and make the statement more polite. 存じます can be used instead of 思う／思います, as in (4), to create an even politer expression. Sentence-final use of ...たい（です） gives an impression of childishness and is not appropriate in formal conversation among adults, in which case たい is usually followed by 思う or のだ.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x8753"><span class="number">4. </span>...おもう</h2><h4 class="info">［Na におもう］</h4><h4 class="info">［A-くおもう］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>先生</rb><rt>せん せい</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>指導</rb><rt>し どう</rt></ruby>していただけることになって、<ruby><rb>本当</rb><rt>ほん  とう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>幸</rb><rt>しあわ</rt></ruby>せに<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>います。</span>／<span class="translation">I am very happy to have the opportunity to be instructed by you.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>バスが<ruby><rb>全然</rb><rt>ぜん ぜん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>ないので、<ruby><rb>不思議</rb><rt>ふ し ぎ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>って<ruby><rb>聞</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>いてみたら、<ruby><rb>昨日</rb><rt>きのう</rt></ruby>からダイヤが<ruby><rb>変</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>わったとのことだった。</span>／<span class="translation">I wondered why there were no buses coming, so I asked, and they said that the bus schedule had changed starting yesterday.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>この<ruby><rb>度</rb><rt>たび</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>突然</rb><rt>とつ ぜん</rt></ruby>のご<ruby><rb>逝去</rb><rt>せい きょ</rt></ruby>をまことに<ruby><rb>辛</rb><rt>つら</rt></ruby>く<ruby><rb>悲</rb><rt>かな</rt></ruby>しく<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>います。</span>／<span class="translation">I am deeply grieved to hear of his sudden death.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>お<ruby><rb>会</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>いできてうれしく<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>います。</span>／<span class="translation">It was very nice to have the chance to see you.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>このような<ruby><rb>賞</rb><rt>しょう</rt></ruby>をいただくことができ、まことに<ruby><rb>光栄</rb><rt>こう えい</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>存</rb><rt>ぞん</rt></ruby>じます。</span>／<span class="translation">It is truly an honor to receive a prize such as this.</span></div><div class="explanation">When 思うfollows the conjunctive form of <i>i</i>-adjectives and <i>na</i>-adjectives that express feelings or emotions, it expresses how the speaker feels. The pattern XをYに（Yく）おもう is also used, as in (2) and (3). To ask about the listener’s impression, どう思う／思いますか are used, as in the example below.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>あの人についてどう思いますか。／What do you think of that person?</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x8815"><span class="number">5. </span>V-ようとおもう</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>今日</rb><rt>きょう</rt></ruby>はゆっくり<ruby><rb>休</rb><rt>やす</rt></ruby>もうと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>う。</span>／<span class="translation">I’m going to take it easy and rest today.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>この<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>をやめようと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>っている。</span>／<span class="translation">I’m thinking of quitting this job.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>夏休</rb><rt>なつ やす</rt></ruby>みはどうするつもりですか。</span>／<span class="translation">What are you planning to do this summer vacation?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>ヨーロッパを<ruby><rb>旅行</rb><rt>りょ こう</rt></ruby>しようと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>っています。</span>／<span class="translation">I’m going to tour Europe.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>将来</rb><rt>しょう らい</rt></ruby>、どんな<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>をしようと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>っているんですか。</span>／<span class="translation">So what sort of work are you going to do in the future?</span></div><div class="explanation">When combined with the intentional form of a verb, と思う expresses the speaker’s plans or intentions. In interrogative sentences, the function of this combination is to ask about the listener’s intentions. When と思う is used with the dictionary form, as in the following example, it indicates that the speaker’s plans are uncertain; this form cannot be used to express intention.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>私は来年アメリカに行くと思う。／I think I’ll go to the U.S. next year.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x8873"><span class="number">6. </span>...ようにおもう</h2><h4 class="info">［N／Na　であるようにおもう］</h4><h4 class="info">［A／V　ようにおもう］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>太田</rb><rt>おお た</rt></ruby>くんは<ruby><rb>内気</rb><rt>うち き</rt></ruby>なので、ウェイターの<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>向</rb><rt>む</rt></ruby>いていないように<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>う。</span>／<span class="translation">Because Ota-kun is shy, I don’t think he is suited to be a waiter.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>住民</rb><rt>じゅう みん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>多</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>くが<ruby><rb>反対</rb><rt>はん たい</rt></ruby>していることを<ruby><rb>考</rb><rt>かんが</rt></ruby>えると、マンションの<ruby><rb>建築</rb><rt>けん ちく</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>見合</rb><rt>み あ</rt></ruby>わせた<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>ほう</rt></ruby>がいいように<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>う。</span>／<span class="translation">Considering the fact that many local residents are opposed to it, I think it would be better to postpone construction of the condominiums.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>この<ruby><rb>社員</rb><rt>しゃ いん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>旅行</rb><rt>りょ こう</rt></ruby>のプランはちょっとゆとりがなさすぎるように<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>うのですが。こんなに<ruby><rb>短期間</rb><rt>たん き かん</rt></ruby>であちこち<ruby><rb>動</rb><rt>うご</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>回</rb><rt>まわ</rt></ruby>っても<ruby><rb>疲</rb><rt>つか</rt></ruby>れるだけではないでしょうか。</span>／<span class="translation">I think the plan for this company trip doesn’t include enough free time. Moving from one place to another in such a short time will only tire everyone out.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>《<ruby><rb>上司</rb><rt>じょう し</rt></ruby>に》パソコンは<ruby><rb>一人</rb><rt>ひとり</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>一台</rb><rt>いち だい</rt></ruby>あった<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>ほう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>能率</rb><rt>のう りつ</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>がるように<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>うのですが、<ruby><rb>購入</rb><rt>こう にゅう</rt></ruby>するわけにはいきませんか。</span>／<span class="translation">《to one’s boss》I think we would be able to work more efficiently if each person had <span class="noSeparate">his/her</span> own computer. Couldn’t we buy more computers?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>国民</rb><rt>こく みん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>一人一人</rb><rt>ひとりひとり</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>幸</rb><rt>しあわ</rt></ruby>せを<ruby><rb>考</rb><rt>かんが</rt></ruby>えることは<ruby><rb>首相</rb><rt>しゅ しょう</rt></ruby>としての<ruby><rb>当然</rb><rt>とう ぜん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>義務</rb><rt>ぎ む</rt></ruby>であるように<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>われますが、<ruby><rb>首相</rb><rt>しゅ しょう</rt></ruby>はいかがお<ruby><rb>考</rb><rt>かんが</rt></ruby>えでしょうか。</span>／<span class="translation">It seems to me that considering the happiness of each and every citizen is a given duty of the prime minister. What do you, as prime minister, think about this?</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses a mild assertion of opinion. Often used when the speaker thinks there is a possibility that the listener has a different opinion, or when the speaker offers an opinion with which it is difficult for the listener to agree. When an even more euphemistic expression is desired, ように思われる is used.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x8920"><span class="number">7. </span>N（のこと）をおもう</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>親</rb><rt>おや</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>う<ruby><rb>気持</rb><rt>き も</rt></ruby>ちは<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なに</rt></ruby>にも<ruby><rb>変</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>えられない。</span>／<span class="translation">Nothing can replace the love parents have for their children.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>いつもあなたのことを<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>っている。</span>／<span class="translation">I’m always thinking about you.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>試験</rb><rt>し けん</rt></ruby>のことを<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>うと<ruby><rb>心配</rb><rt>しん ぱい</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>眠</rb><rt>ねむ</rt></ruby>れない。</span>／<span class="translation">When I think about the exam, I get so worried that I can’t sleep.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>母</rb><rt>はは</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>優</rb><rt>やさ</rt></ruby>しさを<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>うと<ruby><rb>気持</rb><rt>き も</rt></ruby>ちが<ruby><rb>安</rb><rt>やす</rt></ruby>らぐ。</span>／<span class="translation">My mind is at peace when I remember my mother’s gentleness.</span></div><div class="explanation">When combined with a noun or a noun followed by のこと, 思う means that the speaker thinks or feels strongly about something. Depending on the meaning of the preceding noun, it can express a variety of cognitive processes, including imagination, retrospection, anxiety, reserve, and love.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x8957"><span class="number">8. </span>Nを...とおもう</h2><h4 class="info">［Nを　N／Na　だとおもう］</h4><h4 class="info">［Nを　A／V　とおもう］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>最初</rb><rt>さい しょ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>保子</rb><rt>やす こ</rt></ruby>さんを<ruby><rb>男</rb><rt>おとこ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>子</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>だと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>った。</span>／<span class="translation">At first, I thought Yasuko-san was a boy.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>人々</rb><rt>ひと びと</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>考</rb><rt>かんが</rt></ruby>えを<ruby><rb>奇想天外</rb><rt>き そう てん がい</rt></ruby>だと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>ったようだ。</span>／<span class="translation">People seemed to consider my idea to be bizarre.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>みんな、<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>提案</rb><rt>てい あん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>実現</rb><rt>じつ げん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>不可能</rb><rt>ふ か のう</rt></ruby>だと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>って<ruby><rb>相手</rb><rt>あい て</rt></ruby>にしなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">Everyone thought his suggestion was unfeasible and wouldn’t go along with him.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>横顔</rb><rt>よこ がお</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>美</rb><rt>うつく</rt></ruby>しいと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>った。</span>／<span class="translation">I thought her profile was beautiful.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>みんなが<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>のことを<ruby><rb>死</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>んだと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>っていた。</span>／<span class="translation">Everyone thought he had died.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>自分</rb><rt>じ ぶん</rt></ruby>のことを<ruby><rb>天才</rb><rt>てん さい</rt></ruby>だと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>っている。</span>／<span class="translation">He considers himself a genius.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to express one’s feeling, impression, or judgment concerning something. Sometimes Nが is used instead of Nを, as below:</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>人々は私の考えが奇想天外だと思ったようだ。／People seemed to think my idea was bizarre.</div><div class="explanation">Can also be used to indicate that someone has mistaken something or someone for something or someone else, as in (1).</div></body></html>