<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>なお</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0665.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ないものか】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0667.xhtml">【なおす】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x61626">【なお】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x61631"><span class="number">1. </span>なお〈degree〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>あなたが<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>てくれればなお<ruby><rb>都合</rb><rt>つ ごう</rt></ruby>がよい。</span>／<span class="translation">If you could come, it would be even better.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>薬</rb><rt>くすり</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>飲</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>んだのに、<ruby><rb>病状</rb><rt>びょう じょう</rt></ruby>はなお<ruby><rb>悪化</rb><rt>あっ か</rt></ruby>した。</span>／<span class="translation">Even though I took the medicine, my condition kept getting worse.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>祖父</rb><rt>そ ふ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>老</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>いてもなお<ruby><rb>精力的</rb><rt>せい りょく てき</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>続</rb><rt>つづ</rt></ruby>けている。</span>／<span class="translation">Even though my grandfather is getting old, he is still working energetically.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>退院</rb><rt>たい いん</rt></ruby>するまでには、なお1<ruby><rb>週間</rb><rt>しゅう かん</rt></ruby>ぐらい<ruby><rb>必要</rb><rt>ひつ よう</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">You still need another week before you can be released from the hospital.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>反対</rb><rt>はん たい</rt></ruby>されるとなおやってみたくなる。</span>／<span class="translation">The more they oppose me, the more I want to do it.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means that one thing has a comparatively higher degree of something than another, in which case it is similar to 一層 (all the more), もっと (further), さらに (still more), and そのうえ (on top of that). In other contexts, it means that the same situation continues as before, in which case it is similar to まだ (still/yet), 相変わらず (as usual), and 今もなお (still). When the first and second clauses contrast in meaning, as in (5), the meaning of なお is close to that of かえって (instead/all the more).</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x61677"><span class="number">2. </span>なお〈provisional clause〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>入学</rb><rt>にゅう がく</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>希望者</rb><rt>き ぼう しゃ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>期日</rb><rt>き じつ</rt></ruby>までに、<ruby><rb>入学金</rb><rt>にゅう がく きん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>納入</rb><rt>のう にゅう</rt></ruby>してください。なお、いったん<ruby><rb>納入</rb><rt>のう にゅう</rt></ruby>された<ruby><rb>入学金</rb><rt>にゅう がく きん</rt></ruby>は、いかなる<ruby><rb>場合</rb><rt>ば あい</rt></ruby>にもお<ruby><rb>返</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>しできませんので、ご<ruby><rb>了承</rb><rt>りょう しょう</rt></ruby>ください。</span>／<span class="translation">Prospective students should pay the enrollment fee by the due date. Also, please note that once the enrollment fee has been paid, it is not refundable under any circumstances.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>毎月</rb><rt>まい つき</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>第三</rb><rt>だいさん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>水曜日</rb><rt>すい よう び</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>定例</rb><rt>ていれい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>会議</rb><rt>かい ぎ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>日</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby>とします。なお、<ruby><rb>詳</rb><rt>くわ</rt></ruby>しい<ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby>などは、1<ruby><rb>週間前</rb><rt>しゅう かん まえ</rt></ruby>までに<ruby><rb>文書</rb><rt>ぶん しょ</rt></ruby>でお<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>らせすることにします。</span>／<span class="translation">The day for the regular meeting will be the third Wednesday of every month. Note that further details, including the time, will be communicated in writing no later than one week in advance.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>参加</rb><rt>さん か</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>希望者</rb><rt>き ぼう しゃ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>葉書</rb><rt>は がき</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>申</rb><rt>もう</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>込</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>んでください。なお、<ruby><rb>希望者</rb><rt>き ぼう しゃ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>多数</rb><rt>た すう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>場合</rb><rt>ば あい</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>先着順</rb><rt>せん ちゃく じゅん</rt></ruby>とさせていただきます。</span>／<span class="translation">Applicants are requested to register by postcard. Please also note that if the number of applicants exceeds the limit, selection will be made on a first-come-first-served basis.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>明日</rb><rt>あ す</rt></ruby>は、2、3<ruby><rb>年生</rb><rt>ねん せい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>授業</rb><rt>じゅ ぎょう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>休講</rb><rt>きゅう こう</rt></ruby>になります。なお、4<ruby><rb>年</rb><rt>ねん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>生</rb><rt>せい</rt></ruby>のみが<ruby><rb>対象</rb><rt>たい しょう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>授業</rb><rt>じゅ ぎょう</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>通常</rb><rt>つう じょう</rt></ruby>どおり<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>おこな</rt></ruby>いますので<ruby><rb>注意</rb><rt>ちゅう い</rt></ruby>してください。</span>／<span class="translation">Classes for second- and third-year students will be canceled tomorrow. However, please be aware that classes for fourth-year students will be held as usual.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to add a proviso, supplementary explanation, exception, or special case to a topic that has just been concluded, or to present a new topic that is not directly related to the previous sentence. As illustrated in (4), when the sentence after なお adds information that is not consistent with the expectation created by the previous sentence, the meaning of なお is similar to that of ただし (but/however). なお is not used often in spoken Japanese. However, it is used often in posted notices, written announcements, explanatory notes in academic papers, and other written contexts.</div></body></html>