<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ものがある</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0998.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ものか】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part1000.xhtml">【ものだ】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x98919">【ものがある】</h1><h4 class="info">［Na なものがある］</h4><h4 class="info">［A-いものがある］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-るものがある］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>この<ruby><rb>作品</rb><rt>さく ひん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>発想</rb><rt>はっ そう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>斬新</rb><rt>ざん しん</rt></ruby>なものがある。</span>／<span class="translation">There is an originality of conception to this work.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>潜在</rb><rt>せんざい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>能力</rb><rt>のう りょく</rt></ruby>にはすばらしいものがある。</span>／<span class="translation">He has wonderful potential.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>この<ruby><rb>文章</rb><rt>ぶん しょう</rt></ruby>はまだまだ<ruby><rb>未熟</rb><rt>み じゅく</rt></ruby>だが、しかし<ruby><rb>随所</rb><rt>ずい しょ</rt></ruby>にキラリと<ruby><rb>光</rb><rt>ひか</rt></ruby>るものがある。</span>／<span class="translation">This composition is still not polished, but there are flashes of brilliance everywhere.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>企画書</rb><rt>き かく しょ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>結局</rb><rt>けっ きょく</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>通</rb><rt>とお</rt></ruby>らなかったが、いくつかの<ruby><rb>点</rb><rt>てん</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>るべきものがある。</span>／<span class="translation">In the end, her (business) proposal was not accepted, but there were some points that were commendable.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means that certain characteristics are evident. The 見るべきもの in example (4) means “excellent points that are notable.” In place of ある, forms such as 見られる and 認められる can also be used. </div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>この文章はまだまだ未熟だが、しかし随所にキラリと光るものが見られる。／This composition is still not polished, but you can see flashes of brilliance everywhere.</div><div class="explanation">Has the tone of written language.</div></body></html>