<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>といったらありはしない</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0535.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【といった】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0537.xhtml">【といったらありゃしない】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x50448">【といったらありはしない】</h1><h4 class="info">［Nといったらありはしない］</h4><h4 class="info">［A-いといったらありはしない］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>この<ruby><rb>年</rb><rt>とし</rt></ruby>になってから<ruby><rb>一人</rb><rt>ひとり</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>暮</rb><rt>ぐ</rt></ruby>らしを<ruby><rb>始</rb><rt>はじ</rt></ruby>める<ruby><rb>心細</rb><rt>こころ ぼそ</rt></ruby>さといったらありはしない。</span>／<span class="translation">There are no words to describe the loneliness I feel at having started to live alone at this age.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>はこっちが<ruby><rb>立場上</rb><rt>たち ば じょう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>断</rb><rt>ことわ</rt></ruby>れないとわかっていて、わざといやな<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>押</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>しつけてくるのだ。くやしいといったらありはしない。</span>／<span class="translation">She knows that my position makes it impossible to refuse, and so she intentionally pushes this thankless job on me! I’m incredibly peeved.</span></div><div class="explanation">Has nearly the same meaning as といったらない, but is used only to express dissatisfaction or criticism of a situation. Has the tone of written language.</div></body></html>