<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>なにしろ</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0699.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【なにげない】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0701.xhtml">【なににもまして】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x64279">【なにしろ】</h1><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>なにしろ<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>頭</rb><rt>あたま</rt></ruby>がいいから、<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>がどんなに<ruby><rb>頑張</rb><rt>がん ば</rt></ruby>っても<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>負</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>かされてしまう。</span>／<span class="translation">After all, he is smart, so no matter how hard I try, I lose every argument.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>なにしろ<ruby><rb>観光</rb><rt>かん こう</rt></ruby>シーズンですからどのホテルも<ruby><rb>予約</rb><rt>よ やく</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>取</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>れないと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>います。</span>／<span class="translation">At any rate, this is the tourist season, so I don’t think you’ll be able to get reservations at any hotel.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>もっと<ruby><rb>早</rb><rt>はや</rt></ruby>くお<ruby><rb>便</rb><rt>たよ</rt></ruby>りしようと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>っていたのですが、なにしろ<ruby><rb>忙</rb><rt>いそが</rt></ruby>しくてゆっくり<ruby><rb>机</rb><rt>つくえ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>向</rb><rt>む</rt></ruby>かう<ruby><rb>暇</rb><rt>ひま</rt></ruby>もありませんでした。</span>／<span class="translation">I meant to write to you much earlier, but what with my busy schedule, I haven’t even had time to sit down at my desk.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>どこにも<ruby><rb>異常</rb><rt>い じょう</rt></ruby>はないかもしれないが、なにしろ<ruby><rb>大至急</rb><rt>だい し きゅう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>検査</rb><rt>けん さ</rt></ruby>をしてみる<ruby><rb>必要</rb><rt>ひつ よう</rt></ruby>がある。</span>／<span class="translation">There may be no problem anywhere, but still it’s necessary to do an examination as soon as possible.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to emphasize a certain thing, at least for the time being, while leaving various other possibilities aside. Often used to state the reason for something, in patterns such as なにしろ...から and なにしろ...て. Similar to なんにしても (in any case) and とにかく (anyway).</div></body></html>