<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>させる</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0248.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【さすが】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0250.xhtml">【さぞ...ことだろう】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x19236">【させる】</h1><div class="explanation">Expresses causation. When the verb in V-させる is a Group 1 verb, the vowel in the final syllable of the dictionary form changes from -<i>u</i> to -<i>a</i> and then せる is attached, as in 行く→行かせる and 飲む→飲ませる. For Group 2 verbs such as 食べる, させる is attached to the stem 食べ and the conjugation pattern is 食べる→食べさせる. The causative form of する is させる, and 来る becomes こさせる. In spoken language, the forms 行かす, 飲ます, 食べさす, and so on may also be used.</div><div class="explanation">A causative sentence essentially conveys the meaning that one person orders or directs another person to do something. However, in actual usage the causative form expresses a broader range of meaning, including coercion, instruction, non-interference, permission, and so on.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例1）</span>〈強制〉犯人は銀行員に現金を用意させた。／〈coercion〉The criminal made the bank clerk prepare the cash. </div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例2）</span>〈指示〉社長は秘書にタイプを打たせた。 ／〈instruction〉The company president had the secretary do the typing. </div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例3）</span>〈放任〉疲れているようだったので、そのまま眠らせておいた。 ／〈non-interference〉Since she seemed to be tired, I let her sleep. </div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例4）</span>〈許可〉社長は給料を前借りさせてくれた。 ／〈permission〉The president let me have an advance on my salary. </div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例5）</span>〈放置〉風呂の水をあふれさせるな。／〈neglect〉Don’t let the bathwater overflow. </div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例6）</span>〈介護〉子供にミルクを飲ませる時間です。 ／〈care〉It’s time to give the child some milk. </div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例7）</span>〈自責〉子どもを事故で死なせてしまった。 ／〈self-reproach〉It’s my fault that my child died in the accident. </div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例8）</span>〈原因〉フロンガスが地球を温暖化させている。 ／〈cause〉Chlorofluorocarbon is causing global warming. </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x19336"><span class="number">1. </span>V-させる</h2><h3 class="subsubtitle" id="idsubsubtitlex1x19339"><span class="number">a. </span>NがNにNを V-させる</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>教師</rb><rt>きょう し</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>学生</rb><rt>がく せい</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>本</rb><rt>ほん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>読</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>ませた。</span>／<span class="translation">The teacher made the students read the book. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>犯人</rb><rt>はん にん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>銀行員</rb><rt>ぎん こう いん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>現金</rb><rt>げん きん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>用意</rb><rt>よう い</rt></ruby>させた。</span>／<span class="translation">The criminal made the bank clerk prepare the cash. </span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>機械</rb><rt>き かい</rt></ruby>がまた<ruby><rb>故障</rb><rt>こ しょう</rt></ruby>なんですが...。</span>／<span class="translation">The machine is out of order again....</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span><ruby><rb>申</rb><rt>もう</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>訳</rb><rt>わけ</rt></ruby>ありません。すぐに<ruby><rb>係</rb><rt>かか</rt></ruby>りの<ruby><rb>者</rb><rt>もの</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>伺</rb><rt>うかが</rt></ruby>わせます。</span>／<span class="translation">We apologize for the inconvenience. We will send the person in charge over immediately.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>山田</rb><rt>やま だ</rt></ruby>はひどい<ruby><rb>奴</rb><rt>やつ</rt></ruby>だ。<ruby><rb>旅行中</rb><rt>りょ こう ちゅう</rt></ruby>ずっと<ruby><rb>僕</rb><rt>ぼく</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>運転</rb><rt>うん てん</rt></ruby>させて、<ruby><rb>自分</rb><rt>じ ぶん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>寝</rb><rt>ね</rt></ruby>てるんだよ。</span>／<span class="translation">Yamada is a horrible person. When we were traveling, he made me drive all the way while he just slept. </span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses a variety of meanings, such as coercion, instruction, and non-interference. The causative sentence NがNにNをV-させる is derived from a sentence with a transitive verb NがNを(transitive) V. The subject Nが of the transitive sentence becomes Nに.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x19388"><span class="number">b. </span>NがN　を／に　V-させる</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>子</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>どもを<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>物</rb><rt>もの</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>かせた。</span>／<span class="translation">I had the children go shopping. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>社長</rb><rt>しゃ ちょう</rt></ruby>は、まず<ruby><rb>山田</rb><rt>やま だ</rt></ruby>をソファーにかけさせて、しばらく<ruby><rb>世間話</rb><rt>せ けん ばなし</rt></ruby>をしてから<ruby><rb>退職</rb><rt>たい しょく</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はなし</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>切</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>りだした。</span>／<span class="translation">The company president first had Yamada sit on the sofa and then, after making small talk for a little while, he broached the subject of retirement. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>最近</rb><rt>さい きん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>小学生</rb><rt>しょう がく せい</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>塾</rb><rt>じゅく</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>通</rb><rt>かよ</rt></ruby>わせる<ruby><rb>親</rb><rt>おや</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>多</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>い。</span>／<span class="translation">Many parents send their elementary school-aged children to <i>juku</i> (cram schools) these days. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>きな<ruby><rb>契約</rb><rt>けい やく</rt></ruby>だから、<ruby><rb>新入社員</rb><rt>しん にゅう しゃ いん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>かせるのは<ruby><rb>心配</rb><rt>しん ぱい</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">Since it’s a big contract, I’m worried about letting a new employee go on her own. </span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses a variety of meanings, such as coercion, instruction, and non-interference. The causative sentence NがNを／にV-させる is derived from a sentence with an intransitive verb Nが(intransitive) V. The subject Nが of the intransitive sentence often becomes Nを, but may sometimes become Nに.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x19431"><span class="number">c. </span>NがNをV-させる〈person〉</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は、いつも<ruby><rb>冗談</rb><rt>じょう だん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ってみんなを<ruby><rb>笑</rb><rt>わら</rt></ruby>わせる。</span>／<span class="translation">He is always telling jokes and making everyone laugh. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>就職</rb><rt>しゅう しょく</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>試験</rb><rt>し けん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>受</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>けなかったために、<ruby><rb>父</rb><rt>ちち</rt></ruby>をすっかり<ruby><rb>怒</rb><rt>おこ</rt></ruby>らせてしまった。</span>／<span class="translation">The fact that I didn’t take the employment test made my father very angry. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>頃</rb><rt>ころ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>乱暴</rb><rt>らん ぼう</rt></ruby>で、<ruby><rb>近所</rb><rt>きん じょ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>子</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>をよく<ruby><rb>泣</rb><rt>な</rt></ruby>かせていた。</span>／<span class="translation">When I was a child I was wild and unruly, and often made the children in my neighborhood cry. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>二年</rb><rt>に ねん</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>続</rb><rt>つづ</rt></ruby>けて<ruby><rb>落第</rb><rt>らく だい</rt></ruby>して<ruby><rb>母</rb><rt>はは</rt></ruby>をがっかりさせた。</span>／<span class="translation">I disappointed my mother by flunking a grade two years in a row. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>厳</rb><rt>きび</rt></ruby>しくしつけすぎて、<ruby><rb>息子</rb><rt>むすこ</rt></ruby>をすっかりいじけさせてしまった。</span>／<span class="translation">I brought my son up so strictly that he became utterly intimidated.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>子</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>どもを<ruby><rb>交通</rb><rt>こう つう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>事故</rb><rt>じ こ</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>死</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>なせてからというもの、<ruby><rb>毎日</rb><rt>まい にち</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>失意</rb><rt>しつ い</rt></ruby>のどん<ruby><rb>底</rb><rt>ぞこ</rt></ruby>であった。</span>／<span class="translation">From the time I lost my child in a traffic accident, I have been in the depths of despair every day. </span></div><div class="explanation">Means “induce someone to do...” or “be the cause of someone doing....” In this pattern, the causative sentences use intransitive verbs that express an action that a person cannot control, such as 泣く (cry), 笑う (laugh), and 怒る (get angry). The subject Nが in Nが (intransitive) V becomes Nを in the causative sentence. Example (5) expresses a sense of self-reproach on the part of the speaker, because even though the incident in question was not intentional and <span class="noSeparate">s/he</span> was not the direct cause, the child was under <span class="noSeparate">his/her</span> care when the incident took place.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x19483"><span class="number">d. </span>NがNを V-させる〈thing〉</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>シャーベットは、<ruby><rb>果汁</rb><rt>か じゅう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>凍</rb><rt>こお</rt></ruby>らせて<ruby><rb>作</rb><rt>つく</rt></ruby>ります。</span>／<span class="translation">Sherbet is made by freezing fruit juice. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>打撲</rb><rt>だ ぼく</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>傷</rb><rt>いた</rt></ruby>みには、タオルを<ruby><rb>水</rb><rt>みず</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>湿</rb><rt>しめ</rt></ruby>らせて<ruby><rb>冷</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby>やすとよい。</span>／<span class="translation">To ease the ache of a bruise, it’s good to cool it with a wet towel. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>貿易</rb><rt>ぼう えき</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>不均衡</rb><rt>ふ きん こう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>日米</rb><rt>にちべい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>関係</rb><rt>かん けい</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>硬化</rb><rt>こう か</rt></ruby>させている。</span>／<span class="translation">The trade imbalance is putting a strain on Japan-US relations. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>金融</rb><rt>きん ゆう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>不安</rb><rt>ふ あん</rt></ruby>が、<ruby><rb>日本</rb><rt>に ほん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>経済</rb><rt>けい ざい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>状態</rb><rt>じょう たい</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>悪化</rb><rt>あっ か</rt></ruby>させる<ruby><rb>原因</rb><rt>げん いん</rt></ruby>となっている。</span>／<span class="translation">Financial instability is causing the economic situation in Japan to deteriorate. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>子供達</rb><rt>こ ども たち</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>目</rb><rt>め</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>輝</rb><rt>かがや</rt></ruby>かせて<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はなし</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>聞</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>っている。</span>／<span class="translation">The children are listening intently to the story, their eyes sparkling. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>猫</rb><rt>ねこ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>目</rb><rt>め</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>光</rb><rt>ひか</rt></ruby>らせて<ruby><rb>暗闇</rb><rt>くら やみ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>潜</rb><rt>ひそ</rt></ruby>んでいる。</span>／<span class="translation">The cat is lurking in the darkness, its eyes sharp. </span></div><div class="explanation">Means “induce something to do...” or “be the cause of something doing....” In this usage, the causative form of an intransitive verb without a corresponding transitive verb, such as 凍る (freeze) or 湿る (become moist/wet), is used the same way as a transitive verb. 目を輝かせる and 目を光らせる in (5) and (6) are idiomatic expressions.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x19535"><span class="number">2. </span>V-させてあげる〈permission〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>そんなにこの<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>がやりたいのなら、やらせてあげましょう。</span>／<span class="translation">If you want to do this job so much, I will let you do it.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>従業員</rb><rt>じゅう ぎょう いん</rt></ruby>たちもずいぶんよく<ruby><rb>働</rb><rt>はたら</rt></ruby>いてくれた。2、3<ruby><rb>日</rb><rt>にち</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>休</rb><rt>やす</rt></ruby>みをとらせてやってはどうだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">The employees have worked extremely hard. Why don’t we let them have a few days off? </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>きのうの<ruby><rb>晩</rb><rt>ばん</rt></ruby>、ずいぶん<ruby><rb>遅</rb><rt>おそ</rt></ruby>くまで<ruby><rb>勉強</rb><rt>べん きょう</rt></ruby>をしていたようだから、もう<ruby><rb>少</rb><rt>すこ</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>休</rb><rt>やす</rt></ruby>ませてあげましょう。</span>／<span class="translation">She seems to have been up quite late studying last night, so let’s let her sleep a little while longer.</span></div><div class="explanation">A causative expression combined with あげる, やる, etc. indicates permission or non-interference.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x19569"><span class="number">3. </span>V-させておく〈non-interference〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>甘</rb><rt>あま</rt></ruby>えて<ruby><rb>泣</rb><rt>な</rt></ruby>いているだけだから、そのまま<ruby><rb>泣</rb><rt>な</rt></ruby>かせておきなさい。</span>／<span class="translation">He’s just crying like a spoilt baby, so leave him be and let him cry.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>注意</rb><rt>ちゅう い</rt></ruby>したってどうせ<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>うことなんか<ruby><rb>聞</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>こうとしないんだ。<ruby><rb>勝手</rb><rt>かっ て</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>好</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>きなことをさせておけばいいさ。</span>／<span class="translation">It doesn’t matter what advice other people give her, she won’t listen anyway. Just let her do whatever she wants.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>夕方</rb><rt>ゆう がた</rt></ruby>になると<ruby><rb>急</rb><rt>きゅう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>冷</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby>え<ruby><rb>込</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>みますから、あんまり<ruby><rb>遅</rb><rt>おそ</rt></ruby>くまで<ruby><rb>遊</rb><rt>あそ</rt></ruby>ばせておいてはいけませんよ。</span>／<span class="translation">When evening comes it gets cold all of a sudden, so you shouldn’t let them play outside too late. </span></div><div class="explanation">A causative expression combined with おく indicates non-interference.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x19603"><span class="number">4. </span>V-させてください〈request for permission〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>申</rb><rt>もう</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>訳</rb><rt>わけ</rt></ruby>ありませんが、<ruby><rb>今日</rb><rt>きょう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>少</rb><rt>すこ</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>早</rb><rt>はや</rt></ruby>く<ruby><rb>帰</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>らせてください。</span>／<span class="translation">I’m very sorry, but please let me go home a little early today. </span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><span class="number">A:</span>だれか、この<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>引</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>受</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>けてくれませんか。</span>／<span class="translation">Is there anyone who will take this job on? </span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>ぜひ、<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>にやらせてください。</span>／<span class="translation">Please let me do it!</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>御馳走</rb><rt>ご ち そう</rt></ruby>しますよ。</span>／<span class="translation">This will be my treat. </span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>いや、いつも<ruby><rb>御馳走</rb><rt>ご ち そう</rt></ruby>になってばかりですので、ここは、<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>払</rb><rt>はら</rt></ruby>わせてください。</span>／<span class="translation">Thank you, but since you always treat me, please let me pay here. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>少</rb><rt>すこ</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>考</rb><rt>かんが</rt></ruby>えさせていただけますか。</span>／<span class="translation">Could you give me some time to think it over? </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>期日</rb><rt>き じつ</rt></ruby>については、こちらで<ruby><rb>決</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>めさせていただけるとありがたいのですが...。</span>／<span class="translation">We would appreciate it if you would let us decide on the deadline....</span></div><div class="explanation">A causative expression combined with an expression of request, such as ください or いただけますか, indicates a request for permission. As in (3), this pattern is also used to make a polite offer.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x19673"><span class="number">5. </span>V-させて　もらう／くれる〈favor〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>両親</rb><rt>りょう しん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>早</rb><rt>はや</rt></ruby>く<ruby><rb>亡</rb><rt>な</rt></ruby>くなったので、<ruby><rb>姉</rb><rt>あね</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>働</rb><rt>はたら</rt></ruby>いて<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>大学</rb><rt>だい がく</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>かせてくれた。</span>／<span class="translation">Since both of my parents passed away when I was young, my older sister worked to put me through college.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>金婚式</rb><rt>きん こん しき</rt></ruby>のお<ruby><rb>祝</rb><rt>いわ</rt></ruby>いに、<ruby><rb>子</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>ども<ruby><rb>達</rb><rt>たち</rt></ruby>にハワイに<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>かせてもらった。</span>／<span class="translation">To celebrate our golden wedding anniversary, our children gave us a trip to Hawaii. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>《<ruby><rb>結婚式</rb><rt>けっ こん しき</rt></ruby>のスピーチ》<ruby><rb>新婦</rb><rt>しん ぷ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>友人</rb><rt>ゆう じん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>代表</rb><rt>だい ひょう</rt></ruby>して、<ruby><rb>一言</rb><rt>ひと こと</rt></ruby>ご<ruby><rb>挨拶</rb><rt>あい さつ</rt></ruby>させていただきます。</span>／<span class="translation">《wedding speech》On behalf of the friends of the bride, I would like to say a few words. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>《パーティーで》では、<ruby><rb>僭越</rb><rt>せん えつ</rt></ruby>ではございますが、<ruby><rb>乾杯</rb><rt>かん ぱい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>音頭</rb><rt>おん ど</rt></ruby>をとらせていただきます。</span>／<span class="translation">《at a party》Now, if you will allow me, I would like to propose a toast. </span></div><div class="explanation">A causative expression combined with もらう (receive) or くれる (give), etc. shows that the speaker views being allowed or left to do something as a kind of favor. (3) and (4) are idiomatic expressions used as introductory remarks in speeches, etc. They are humble expressions that imply the speaker’s gratitude or sense of honor at being asked to undertake a certain task.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x19713"><span class="number">6. </span>V-させられる〈causative passive〉</h2><h4 class="info">［NがNにVさせられる］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>きのうは、お<ruby><rb>母</rb><rt>かあ</rt></ruby>さんに3<ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>勉強</rb><rt>べん きょう</rt></ruby>させられた。</span>／<span class="translation">Yesterday, I was forced by my mother to study for three whole hours. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>先輩</rb><rt>せん ぱい</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>無理</rb><rt>む り</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>酒</rb><rt>さけ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>飲</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>まされた。</span>／<span class="translation">I was forced to drink alcohol by a senior student. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>この<ruby><rb>歳</rb><rt>とし</rt></ruby>になって、<ruby><rb>海外</rb><rt>かい がい</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>転勤</rb><rt>てん きん</rt></ruby>させられるとは<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>ってもみなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">At my age, I certainly didn’t expect to be transferred overseas. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>山下</rb><rt>やま した</rt></ruby>さんは、<ruby><rb>毎日</rb><rt>まい にち</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>遅</rb><rt>おそ</rt></ruby>くまで<ruby><rb>残業</rb><rt>ざん ぎょう</rt></ruby>させられているらしい。</span>／<span class="translation">Apparently Yamashita-san is being forced to work overtime until late every day.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>きのうのサッカーの<ruby><rb>試合</rb><rt>し あい</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>逆転</rb><rt>ぎゃく てん</rt></ruby>につぐ<ruby><rb>逆転</rb><rt>ぎゃく てん</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>最後</rb><rt>さい ご</rt></ruby>までハラハラさせられた。</span>／<span class="translation">Yesterday’s soccer game kept me on pins and needles right up to the end, with one reversal after another. </span></div><div class="explanation">A causative sentence with the form XがYにV-させる is rephrased from Y’s point of view to create the form YがXにV-させられる, which is a passive sentence. It means that Y is forced by X to do something against <span class="noSeparate">his/her</span> will, and that Y thinks this action is bothersome or objectionable. With Group I verbs such as 行く and 読む, the causative passive form tends to become 行かされる and 読まされる (instead of 行かせられる and 読ませされる).</div></body></html>