<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ひとつまちがえば</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0904.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ひとつ】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0906.xhtml">【ひととおり】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x83905">【ひとつまちがえば】</h1><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>出産</rb><rt>しゅっ さん</rt></ruby>というのは<ruby><rb>大変</rb><rt>たい へん</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>で、<ruby><rb>医学</rb><rt>い がく</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>進</rb><rt>すす</rt></ruby>んだ<ruby><rb>現在</rb><rt>げん ざい</rt></ruby>でもひとつまちがえば<ruby><rb>命</rb><rt>いのち</rt></ruby>にかかわる。</span>／<span class="translation">Giving birth is a huge undertaking, and even with the high standard of modern medicine, one slightest mistake can make a difference of life or death.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>政治家</rb><rt>せい じ か</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>不用意</rb><rt>ふ よう い</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>発言</rb><rt>はつ げん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>続</rb><rt>つづ</rt></ruby>いている。ひとつ<ruby><rb>間違</rb><rt>ま ちが</rt></ruby>えば<ruby><rb>外交</rb><rt>がいこう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>問題</rb><rt>もん だい</rt></ruby>にも<ruby><rb>発展</rb><rt>はっ てん</rt></ruby>しかねない。</span>／<span class="translation">Politicians have been making a series of verbal blunders. One careless utterance could escalate into a diplomatic incident.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>カーレースは、ひとつまちがえば、<ruby><rb>大事故</rb><rt>だい じ こ</rt></ruby>につながることもある<ruby><rb>危険</rb><rt>き けん</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>競技</rb><rt>きょう ぎ</rt></ruby>である。</span>／<span class="translation">Car racing is a dangerous pursuit in which a small error can lead to a major accident.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>ひとつ<ruby><rb>間違</rb><rt>ま ちが</rt></ruby>えば<ruby><rb>大惨事</rb><rt>だい さん じ</rt></ruby>になるところだった。</span>／<span class="translation">At that point, one mistake could have turned it into a disaster.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>乗</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>る<ruby><rb>予定</rb><rt>よ てい</rt></ruby>だった<ruby><rb>飛行機</rb><rt>ひ こう き</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>墜落</rb><rt>つい らく</rt></ruby>した。ひとつ<ruby><rb>間違</rb><rt>ま ちが</rt></ruby>えば、<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>もあの<ruby><rb>事故</rb><rt>じ こ</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>死</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>んでいたと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>うとぞっとする。</span>／<span class="translation">The airplane I was supposed to catch crashed. It chills me to think that I came so close to dying in that accident. </span></div><div class="explanation">Means “by a very small margin.”</div><div class="explanation">Shows that there is a high probability of something disastrous happening, and whether this materializes or not is determined by something very small and marginal. Often used in the form of ひとつまちがえば...こともある／かねない (if it went the wrong way...it could result in ...).</div><div class="explanation">In the cases of (4) and (5), disastrous situations have been narrowly avoided. In particular, ひとつ間違えば...ところだった indicates that “although it didn’t happen, it was very close.”</div></body></html>