<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>となっては</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0606.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【となったら】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0608.xhtml">【となる】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x57581">【となっては】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x57583"><span class="number">1. </span>いまとなっては</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>となっては、<ruby><rb>名前</rb><rt>な まえ</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>顔</rb><rt>かお</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>だ</rt></ruby>すことができない。</span>／<span class="translation">Now at this point, I can’t recall either his name or face.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>全</rb><rt>すべ</rt></ruby>てが<ruby><rb>終</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>わってしまった<ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>となっては、じたばたしてもしかたがない。</span>／<span class="translation">Now that everything is over and done with, there’s no sense in fretting.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>当時</rb><rt>とう じ</rt></ruby>はずいぶん<ruby><rb>辛</rb><rt>つら</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>いをしたものだが、<ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>となっては、それも<ruby><rb>懐</rb><rt>なつ</rt></ruby>かしく<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>だ</rt></ruby>される。</span>／<span class="translation">At the time it was quite painful for me, but now I can think back on it with some nostalgia.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses the meaning “having proceeded through a variety of events to reach this point.” Often followed by expressions stating “that was to be expected/as one would think.” Though it is often followed by negative evaluations of “cannot be done” or “there’s no point anymore,” as in (1) and (2), it can also be a neutral evaluation, as in (3).</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x57614"><span class="number">2. </span>...となっては</h2><h4 class="info">［N／Na　（だ）となっては］</h4><h4 class="info">［A／V　となっては］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>子供達</rb><rt>こ ども たち</rt></ruby>だけで<ruby><rb>海外</rb><rt>かい がい</rt></ruby>へ<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>くとなっては、<ruby><rb>親</rb><rt>おや</rt></ruby>としてはちょっと<ruby><rb>心配</rb><rt>しん ぱい</rt></ruby>になる。</span>／<span class="translation">With the children going overseas all by themselves, as a parent I am a little concerned.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>病状</rb><rt>びょう じょう</rt></ruby>がここまで<ruby><rb>進</rb><rt>すす</rt></ruby>んだとなっては、もうどうすることもできない。</span>／<span class="translation">As the illness has progressed to this point, there’s nothing that can be done.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>誰</rb><rt>だれ</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>引</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>受</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>けてくれないとなっては、<ruby><rb>自分</rb><rt>じ ぶん</rt></ruby>でやるしかない。</span>／<span class="translation">As there’s no one willing to take on the task, it’s up to me to do it.</span></div><div class="explanation">Following a clause, this expresses the meaning “in the case that such a situation arises.” Often used for conditions that have already been realized, and the latter half expresses the evaluation or judgment of the speaker regarding what <span class="noSeparate">s/he</span> expects as the natural outcome of situation. In many cases, negative evaluations such as 心配だ (worrisome) or 仕方がない (can’t be helped) are expressed.</div></body></html>