<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>かならずしも...ない</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0139.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【かならず】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0141.xhtml">【かにみえる】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x11934">【かならずしも...ない】</h1><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>金持</rb><rt>かね も</rt></ruby>ちがかならずしもしあわせだとは<ruby><rb>限</rb><rt>かぎ</rt></ruby>らない。</span>／<span class="translation">The rich are not necessarily happy.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>語学</rb><rt>ご がく</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>得意</rb><rt>とく い</rt></ruby>だからといって、かならずしも<ruby><rb>就職</rb><rt>しゅう しょく</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>有利</rb><rt>ゆう り</rt></ruby>だとは<ruby><rb>限</rb><rt>かぎ</rt></ruby>らない。</span>／<span class="translation">Being good at languages doesn’t always give you an advantage in finding employment. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>日本人</rb><rt>に ほん じん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>礼儀正</rb><rt>れい ぎ ただ</rt></ruby>しい<ruby><rb>人々</rb><rt>ひと びと</rt></ruby>だと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>う<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>もいるようだが、<ruby><rb>実態</rb><rt>じっ たい</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>必</rb><rt>かなら</rt></ruby>ずしもそうではないとわたしは<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>っている。</span>／<span class="translation">Some people say the Japanese people are polite, but I don’t think that is always the case.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>政治家</rb><rt>せい じ か</rt></ruby>たちは<ruby><rb>国連</rb><rt>こく れん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>重要</rb><rt>じゅう よう</rt></ruby>だと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>う。しかし、<ruby><rb>必</rb><rt>かなら</rt></ruby>ずしも、<ruby><rb>常</rb><rt>つね</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>尊重</rb><rt>そん ちょう</rt></ruby>しなければならぬものだと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>っているわけではない。</span>／<span class="translation">Politicians say that the United Nations is important. But they don’t necessarily think it has to be respected at all times.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means that the logical relationship “if X, then invariably Y” does not always apply. For example, (2) means that the proposition 語学が得意なら就職に有利だ (being good at languages is advantageous for getting a job) is not always true. かならずしも is often used with わけではない and とはかぎらない. It has the flavor of written language.</div></body></html>