<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>くせ</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0189.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【くさい】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0191.xhtml">【ください】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x14935">【くせ】</h1><h4 class="info">［Nのくせに］</h4><h4 class="info">［Na なくせに］</h4><h4 class="info">［A／V　くせに］</h4><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x14943"><span class="number">1. </span>...くせに</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>自分</rb><rt>じ ぶん</rt></ruby>ではできないくせに、いつも<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>のやり<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>かた</rt></ruby>にもんくを<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>う。</span>／<span class="translation">Though he can’t do it himself, he is always complaining about other people’s methods.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>もんく<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>うんじゃないの。<ruby><rb>自分</rb><rt>じ ぶん</rt></ruby>はできないくせに。</span>／<span class="translation">Don’t complain. You can’t even do it yourself!</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>あの<ruby><rb>選手</rb><rt>せん しゅ</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>体</rb><rt>からだ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>きいくせに、まったく<ruby><rb>力</rb><rt>ちから</rt></ruby>がない。</span>／<span class="translation">In spite of his size, that player has no strength at all.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>こどものくせにおとなびたものの<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>かた</rt></ruby>をする<ruby><rb>子</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>だな。</span>／<span class="translation">For just being a child, she sure talks like some adult!</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>好</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>きなくせに、<ruby><rb>嫌</rb><rt>きら</rt></ruby>いだと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>いはっている。</span>／<span class="translation">She says she doesn’t like it, even though she really does.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used in the form XくせにY, where the situation Y, which is contrary to what would be expected from the content of X, continues. Y is often an expression of a negative evaluation. The form Y。Xくせに is also used, as in (2). When the subjects of the two clauses are different, as in the next example, くせに cannot be used.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>犬は散歩に行きたがっているくせに、彼はつれて行ってやらなかった。／Despite his dog wanted to go for a walk, he didn’t take it.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>犬は散歩に行きたがっているのに、彼はつれて行ってやらなかった。／Though his dog wanted to go for a walk, he didn’t take it.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x15004"><span class="number">2. </span>...くせして</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>自分</rb><rt>じ ぶん</rt></ruby>ではできないくせして、いつも<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>のやり<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>かた</rt></ruby>についてああだこうだと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>う。</span>／<span class="translation">Although he can’t do it himself, he is always telling other people how to do it.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>のやり<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>かた</rt></ruby>にけちつけるんじゃないの。<ruby><rb>自分</rb><rt>じ ぶん</rt></ruby>ではできないくせして。</span>／<span class="translation">Quit criticizing other people. I know you can’t even do it yourself!</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>この<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>きなからだのくせして、ほんとに<ruby><rb>力</rb><rt>ちから</rt></ruby>がないんだから。</span>／<span class="translation">Even though he’s big, he’s got almost no strength.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>こどものくせしておとなびたものの<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>かた</rt></ruby>をする<ruby><rb>子</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>だな。</span>／<span class="translation">For being just a child, she sure talks like some adult!</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>好</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>きなくせして、<ruby><rb>嫌</rb><rt>きら</rt></ruby>いだと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>いはっている。</span>／<span class="translation">He insists he doesn’t like it, even though he really does.</span></div><div class="explanation">Similar in meaning to くせに, but くせして often gives a more familiar impression.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x15047"><span class="number">3. </span>そのくせ</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>はもんくばかり<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>う。そのくせ<ruby><rb>自分</rb><rt>じ ぶん</rt></ruby>ではなにもしない。</span>／<span class="translation">She’s always complaining. But she does nothing herself.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>自分</rb><rt>じ ぶん</rt></ruby>ではなにもしない。そのくせ、もんくだけは<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>う。</span>／<span class="translation">She does nothing herself. But she always complains.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>はよく<ruby><rb>山田</rb><rt>やま だ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>君</rb><rt>くん</rt></ruby>はバカだと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ってるでしょ。そのくせ、<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>がそうだ、そうだというと、こんどはおこるのよ。</span>／<span class="translation">You know she always says Yamada-kun is a fool. But then, when I say she’s right, she gets angry.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>日本人</rb><rt>に ほん じん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>他人</rb><rt>た にん</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>非常</rb><rt>ひ じょう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>冷淡</rb><rt>れい たん</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>時</rb><rt>とき</rt></ruby>がある、そのくせ<ruby><rb>身内</rb><rt>み うち</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>対</rb><rt>たい</rt></ruby>しては<ruby><rb>異常</rb><rt>い じょう</rt></ruby>なくらい<ruby><rb>仲間</rb><rt>なか ま</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>意識</rb><rt>い しき</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>持</rb><rt>も</rt></ruby>つという<ruby><rb>側面</rb><rt>そく めん</rt></ruby>がある、とその<ruby><rb>研究者</rb><rt>けん きゅう しゃ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>っている。</span>／<span class="translation">That researcher says that, while Japanese people can be extremely standoffish to strangers, they have a remarkably strong sense of bonds with their relatives.</span></div><div class="explanation">Connects two separate sentences. Expresses the same meaning as くせに, but そのくせ can’t be used with prohibitive or imperative expressions, such as もんく言うんじゃないの in example (2) of ...くせに.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>自分では何もしないじゃない。そのくせもんく言うんじゃないの。／You do nothing. Don’t complain.</div></body></html>