<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>あと1</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0016.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【あっての】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0018.xhtml">【あと<sub class="variation">2</sub>】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x948">【あと<sub class="variation">1</sub>】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x954"><span class="number">1. </span>あと〈space〉</h2><h4 class="info">［Nのあと］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-る／V-た　あと］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>みんな<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>後</rb><rt>あと</rt></ruby>についてきてください。</span>／<span class="translation">Everyone, please follow me.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>走</rb><rt>はし</rt></ruby>っていく<ruby><rb>後</rb><rt>あと</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>追</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>いかけた。</span>／<span class="translation">He ran away, but I chased after him. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>観光客</rb><rt>かん こう きゃく</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>去</rb><rt>さ</rt></ruby>ったあとには、お<ruby><rb>菓子</rb><rt>か し</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>袋</rb><rt>ふくろ</rt></ruby>や<ruby><rb>空</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>きかんが<ruby><rb>散</rb><rt>ち</rt></ruby>らばっていた。</span>／<span class="translation">After the tourists left, snack wrappers and empty cans were scattered all over. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>チューリップを<ruby><rb>抜</rb><rt>ぬ</rt></ruby>いたあとに<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>たこともない<ruby><rb>草</rb><rt>くさ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>生</rb><rt>は</rt></ruby>えてきた。</span>／<span class="translation">After we pulled up the tulips, a kind of grass I had never seen began to sprout. </span></div><div class="explanation">あとmeans something is spatially behind or after something. (4) means the place where something was pulled out, but it can also be interpreted as referring to〈time〉, as in Usage 2b. ...をあとにして, in the following example, is an idiom which means “leave for.”</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>彼は、ふるさとの町を後にして、都会へ出ていった。／He left his hometown for the city.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x1007"><span class="number">2. </span>あと〈time〉</h2><h3 class="subsubtitle" id="idsubsubtitlex1x1010"><span class="number">a. </span>...あと</h3><h4 class="info">［Nのあと］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-たあと］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>試験</rb><rt>し けん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>後</rb><rt>あと</rt></ruby>はいつも<ruby><rb>気分</rb><rt>き ぶん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>落</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>ち<ruby><rb>込</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>む。</span>／<span class="translation">I am always depressed after examinations.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>今日</rb><rt>きょう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>夕食</rb><rt>ゆう しょく</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>後</rb><rt>あと</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>友達</rb><rt>とも だち</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>花火</rb><rt>はな び</rt></ruby>をすることになっている。</span>／<span class="translation">I am going to set off fireworks with my friend after dinner today.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>パーティーが<ruby><rb>終</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>わったあとの<ruby><rb>部屋</rb><rt>へ や</rt></ruby>はとても<ruby><rb>散</rb><rt>ち</rt></ruby>らかっていた。</span>／<span class="translation">The room was very messy after the party.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>はアルバイトをやめたあと、<ruby><rb>特</rb><rt>とく</rt></ruby>にすることもなくて<ruby><rb>毎日</rb><rt>まい にち</rt></ruby>ぶらぶらしている。</span>／<span class="translation">Since he left his part-time job, he is idling away every day.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>新</rb><rt>あたら</rt></ruby>しい<ruby><rb>上司</rb><rt>じょう し</rt></ruby>についてひとしきり<ruby><rb>文句</rb><rt>もん く</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ったあとは、けろっとして<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なに</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>不満</rb><rt>ふ まん</rt></ruby>がないかのように<ruby><rb>働</rb><rt>はたら</rt></ruby>いていた。</span>／<span class="translation">After she complained about the new boss for a while, she went back to normal, working like there is nothing to complain about.  </span></div><div class="explanation">In these cases, あとindicates that something has been finished or completed. The clause that follows describes the state at that time, or something that happens next.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x1057"><span class="number">b. </span>...あと　（で／に）</h3><h4 class="info">［Nのあと　で／に］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-たあと　で／に］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>田中</rb><rt>た なか</rt></ruby>さんにはお<ruby><rb>世話</rb><rt>せ わ</rt></ruby>になったから、<ruby><rb>引</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby>っ<ruby><rb>越</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>しの<ruby><rb>後</rb><rt>あと</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>改</rb><rt>あらた</rt></ruby>めてお<ruby><rb>礼</rb><rt>れい</rt></ruby>にうかがおう。</span>／<span class="translation">Since Tanaka-san kindly helped me, after moving I will visit and express my thanks to him. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>映画</rb><rt>えい が</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>たあとでトルコ<ruby><rb>料理</rb><rt>りょう り</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べに<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>きましょう。</span>／<span class="translation">Let’s go out for Turkish food after the movie.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>友達</rb><rt>とも だち</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>旅行</rb><rt>りょ こう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>約束</rb><rt>やく そく</rt></ruby>をしてホテルも<ruby><rb>予約</rb><rt>よ やく</rt></ruby>してしまったあとで、その<ruby><rb>日</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>実</rb><rt>じつ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>出張</rb><rt>しゅっ ちょう</rt></ruby>だったことを<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>いだした。</span>／<span class="translation">After I promised to travel with my friend and reserved a hotel room, I remembered that I actually had to go on a business trip on that day. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>食事</rb><rt>しょく じ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>済</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>ませたあとに1<ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby>ほど<ruby><rb>昼寝</rb><rt>ひる ね</rt></ruby>をした。</span>／<span class="translation">I took a nap for about an hour after finishing lunch.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>みんなが<ruby><rb>帰</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>ってしまったあとには、いつも<ruby><rb>寂</rb><rt>さび</rt></ruby>しい<ruby><rb>気持</rb><rt>き も</rt></ruby>ちにおそわれる。</span>／<span class="translation">After everybody goes home, I always feel lonely. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>詳</rb><rt>くわ</rt></ruby>しい<ruby><rb>釈明</rb><rt>しゃく めい</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>聞</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>いた<ruby><rb>後</rb><rt>あと</rt></ruby>にも、やっぱりおかしいという<ruby><rb>疑念</rb><rt>ぎ ねん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>残</rb><rt>のこ</rt></ruby>っていた。</span>／<span class="translation">Even after hearing a detailed explanation, I still had a suspicion that it was wrong.  </span></div><div class="explanation">Means “afterward.” It is used to describe a chronological sequence of events.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x1110"><span class="number">c. </span>V-たあとから</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>募集</rb><rt>ぼ  しゅう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>締</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>め<ruby><rb>切</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>ったあとから<ruby><rb>応募</rb><rt>おう ぼ</rt></ruby>したいと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ってこられても<ruby><rb>困</rb><rt>こま</rt></ruby>る。</span>／<span class="translation">After the deadline for applications has passed, there is nothing we can do even if someone comes and asks.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>新製品</rb><rt>しん せい ひん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>企画</rb><rt>き かく</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>提出</rb><rt>てい しゅつ</rt></ruby>したあとから、<ruby><rb>新</rb><rt>あたら</rt></ruby>しい<ruby><rb>企画</rb><rt>き かく</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>当分</rb><rt>とう ぶん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>見合</rb><rt>み あ</rt></ruby>わせたいと<ruby><rb>上司</rb><rt>じょう し</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>われてがっかりした。</span>／<span class="translation">I was disappointed to hear that the boss would like to wait before considering a new project, after having submitted my plan for a new product.</span></div><div class="explanation">This means “after a certain thing has taken place.” It is used to say that something else happens which contradicts the previous event.</div></body></html>