<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>そこへ</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0327.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【そこで】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0329.xhtml">【そこへいくと】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x26254">【そこへ】</h1><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>友人</rb><rt>ゆう じん</rt></ruby>のうわさ<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>ばなし</rt></ruby>をしていたら、そこへ<ruby><rb>当</rb><rt>とう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>本人</rb><rt>ほん にん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>てしまった。</span>／<span class="translation">Just as we were talking about our friend, that very person walked in.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>酔</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>っぱらい<ruby><rb>客</rb><rt>きゃく</rt></ruby>がけんかを<ruby><rb>始</rb><rt>はじ</rt></ruby>めた。そこへバーテンが<ruby><rb>止</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>めに<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>はい</rt></ruby>ったが、かえって<ruby><rb>騒</rb><rt>さわ</rt></ruby>ぎが<ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>きくなってしまった。</span>／<span class="translation">Drunken customers started a fight. Then the bartender stepped in to try to stop it, but that only made it worse.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>集会</rb><rt>しゅう かい</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>整然</rb><rt>せい ぜん</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>おこな</rt></ruby>われていた。ところがそこへデモ<ruby><rb>隊</rb><rt>たい</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>はい</rt></ruby>ってきて<ruby><rb>場内</rb><rt>じょう ない</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>騒然</rb><rt>そう ぜん</rt></ruby>となった。</span>／<span class="translation">The meeting was proceeding smoothly. But then a group of demonstrators came in and the place was thrown into an uproar.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “into the scene in question.” Often followed by verbs of movement, such as 来る(to come) and 入る(to enter).</div></body></html>