<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>そして</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0330.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【そしたら】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0332.xhtml">【その...その】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x26354">【そして】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x26359"><span class="number">1. </span>そして〈listing〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>今回</rb><rt>こん かい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>旅行</rb><rt>りょ こう</rt></ruby>ではスペイン、イタリアそしてフランスと、おもに<ruby><rb>南</rb><rt>みなみ</rt></ruby>ヨーロッパを<ruby><rb>中心</rb><rt>ちゅう しん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>回</rb><rt>まわ</rt></ruby>った。</span>／<span class="translation">On this trip I traveled mainly around southern Europe, to Spain, Italy, and France.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>リーダーには<ruby><rb>指導力</rb><rt>し どう りょく</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>判断力</rb><rt>はん だん りょく</rt></ruby>そして<ruby><rb>決断力</rb><rt>けつ だん りょく</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>欠</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>かせない。</span>／<span class="translation">For a leader, leadership ability, judgment, and decisiveness are indispensable.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>おみやげは<ruby><rb>小</rb><rt>ちい</rt></ruby>さくて、そして<ruby><rb>軽</rb><rt>かる</rt></ruby>いものがいい。</span>／<span class="translation">Souvenirs should be small and lightweight.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>この<ruby><rb>病気</rb><rt>びょう き</rt></ruby>には、<ruby><rb>甘</rb><rt>あま</rt></ruby>いもの、あぶらっこいもの、そしてアルコールがよくない。</span>／<span class="translation">Sweets, greasy food, and alcohol are not good for this illness.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to list items or add another item to a list. Almost the same as それに, but そして tends to be used more in written language.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x26399"><span class="number">2. </span>そして〈successive events〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>観客</rb><rt>かん きゃく</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>一人</rb><rt>ひとり</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>帰</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>り、<ruby><rb>二人</rb><rt>ふたり</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>帰</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>り、そして<ruby><rb>最後</rb><rt>さい ご</rt></ruby>にはだれもいなくなってしまった。</span>／<span class="translation">One member of the audience left, and then a second one left, and in the end there was no one left at all.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>山間部</rb><rt>さん かん ぶ</rt></ruby>のこの<ruby><rb>地方</rb><rt>ち ほう</rt></ruby>では、<ruby><rb>刈</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>り<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>れが<ruby><rb>終</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>わると<ruby><rb>短</rb><rt>みじか</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>秋</rb><rt>あき</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>去</rb><rt>さ</rt></ruby>り、そして<ruby><rb>厳</rb><rt>きび</rt></ruby>しい<ruby><rb>冬</rb><rt>ふゆ</rt></ruby>がやってくるのだ。</span>／<span class="translation">In this mountainous area, once the harvesting is over, the short fall season ends and then a hard winter comes. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>はその<ruby><rb>日</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>部下</rb><rt>ぶ か</rt></ruby>にすべてを<ruby><rb>打</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>ち<ruby><rb>明</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>けた。そして<ruby><rb>今後</rb><rt>こん ご</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>対応</rb><rt>たい おう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>夜遅</rb><rt>よる おそ</rt></ruby>くまで<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はな</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>合</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>った。</span>／<span class="translation">That day, he confided everything to his subordinate. Then they discussed what to do from now on, until late into the night. </span></div><div class="explanation">Used to express a chronological sequence of events. Often used to indicate the last event in a series. Somewhat literary in style.</div></body></html>