<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>まさに</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0937.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【まさか】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0939.xhtml">【まじき】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x89044">【まさに】</h1><div class="explanation">This is a formal expression often used in written language. Thus, when used in spoken language, it seems exaggerated or bombastic.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x89056"><span class="number">1. </span>まさに</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>警察</rb><rt>けい さつ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>届</rb><rt>とど</rt></ruby>けられていたのは、まさに<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>がなくした<ruby><rb>書類</rb><rt>しょ るい</rt></ruby>だった。</span>／<span class="translation">The document that had been turned in to the police was the very document that I had lost.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>その<ruby><rb>絵</rb><rt>え</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>実際</rb><rt>じっ さい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>幽霊</rb><rt>ゆう れい</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>描</rb><rt>えが</rt></ruby>いたものとして<ruby><rb>有名</rb><rt>ゆう めい</rt></ruby>で、その<ruby><rb>姿</rb><rt>すがた</rt></ruby>にはまさに<ruby><rb>鬼気</rb><rt>きき</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>迫</rb><rt>せま</rt></ruby>るものがある。</span>／<span class="translation">The painting is famous for depicting real ghosts, and the figures in it are truly eerie.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>《<ruby><rb>領収書</rb><rt>りょう しゅう しょ</rt></ruby>》<ruby><rb>金</rb><rt>きん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>十</rb><rt>じゅう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>万円</rb><rt>まん えん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>正</rb><rt>まさ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>受領</rb><rt>じゅ りょう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>致</rb><rt>いた</rt></ruby>しました。</span>／<span class="translation">《receipt》Receipt of the sum of 100,000 yen is acknowledged.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>日本</rb><rt>に ほん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>政府</rb><rt>せい ふ</rt></ruby>のはっきりしない<ruby><rb>態度</rb><rt>たい ど</rt></ruby>が、アジア<ruby><rb>諸国</rb><rt>しょ こく</rt></ruby>との<ruby><rb>関係</rb><rt>かん けい</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>悪化</rb><rt>あっ か</rt></ruby>させているのではないか。</span>／<span class="translation">I wonder if the ambiguous stance of the Japanese government isn’t harming its relationships with other Asian countries.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>まさにそのとおりだ。</span>／<span class="translation">I am sure that is the case.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>この<ruby><rb>夏</rb><rt>なつ</rt></ruby>、「<ruby><rb>世界</rb><rt>せ かい</rt></ruby>リゾート<ruby><rb>博</rb><rt>はく</rt></ruby>」を<ruby><rb>訪</rb><rt>おとず</rt></ruby>れた<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>は 113 <ruby><rb>万人</rb><rt>まん にん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>超</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>えた。<ruby><rb>同</rb><rt>どう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>博</rb><rt>はく</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>宣伝部</rb><rt>せん でん ぶ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>長</rb><rt>ちょう</rt></ruby>のS<ruby><rb>氏</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>は「<ruby><rb>晴天</rb><rt>せい てん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>続</rb><rt>つづ</rt></ruby>きのまさにリゾート<ruby><rb>日和</rb><rt>び より</rt></ruby>でした。」とほくほく<ruby><rb>顔</rb><rt>がお</rt></ruby>だった。</span>／<span class="translation">This summer, the number of people who went to the World Resort Expo surpassed 1,130,000. The Expo marketing manager, S-shi (Mr. S) congratulated himself by saying, “The stretch of fine weather was perfect for a resort lifestyle.”</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “certainly” or “truly.”</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x89111"><span class="number">2. </span>まさに...V-ようとしている（ところだ）</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>到着</rb><rt>とう ちゃく</rt></ruby>した<ruby><rb>時</rb><rt>とき</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>会議</rb><rt>かい ぎ</rt></ruby>はまさに<ruby><rb>始</rb><rt>はじ</rt></ruby>まろうとしているところだった。</span>／<span class="translation">When I arrived, the meeting was just about to start.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>《テレビ<ruby><rb>中継</rb><rt>ちゅうけい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>放送</rb><rt>ほう そう</rt></ruby>》<ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>まさに<ruby><rb>世紀</rb><rt>せい き</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>祭典</rb><rt>さい てん</rt></ruby>オリンピックが<ruby><rb>始</rb><rt>はじ</rt></ruby>まろうとしております。</span>／<span class="translation">《TV remote broadcasting》The ceremony of the century, the Olympic Games, is about to start now. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>ハイジャックの<ruby><rb>犯人</rb><rt>はん にん</rt></ruby>をのせた<ruby><rb>飛行機</rb><rt>ひ こう き</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>警察</rb><rt>けい さつ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>包囲</rb><rt>ほう い</rt></ruby>する<ruby><rb>中</rb><rt>なか</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>まさに<ruby><rb>飛</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>び<ruby><rb>立</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>とうとしている。</span>／<span class="translation">The airplane with the hijackers aboard is attempting to take off with the police surrounding it.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>らが<ruby><rb>駅</rb><rt>えき</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>到着</rb><rt>とう ちゃく</rt></ruby>した<ruby><rb>時</rb><rt>とき</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>列車</rb><rt>れっ しゃ</rt></ruby>はまさに<ruby><rb>動</rb><rt>うご</rt></ruby>きださんとしているところだった。</span>／<span class="translation">When they arrived at the station, the train was just about to leave.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “(something) is going to take place any time now” or “(something) is about to start now.” When a more formal expression is required, it may be used together with “V-んとしている,” as shown in example (4).</div></body></html>