<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>というか</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0521.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【という<sub class="variation">2</sub>】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0523.xhtml">【ということ】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x49223">【というか】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x49225"><span class="number">1. </span>...というか</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>そんなことをするなんて、ほんとに<ruby><rb>馬鹿</rb><rt>ば か</rt></ruby>というか、<ruby><rb>困</rb><rt>こま</rt></ruby>った<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">That he would do something like that means he’s really a fool, or maybe I should say troublemaker. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>この<ruby><rb>決断</rb><rt>けつ だん</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>勇気</rb><rt>ゆう き</rt></ruby>があるというか、とにかく<ruby><rb>凡人</rb><rt>ぼん じん</rt></ruby>にはなかなかできないことだ。</span>／<span class="translation">This decision is one that shows courage, or at any rate, it would be pretty hard for just an ordinary person.  </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>持</rb><rt>も</rt></ruby>っていたお<ruby><rb>金</rb><rt>かね</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>全部</rb><rt>ぜん ぶ</rt></ruby>あげてしまうとは、<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>がいいというか、びっくりさせられた。</span>／<span class="translation">You could say she’s a wonderful person to give all her money away, or whatever, but it certainly surprised me. </span></div><div class="explanation">Used to make a parenthetical statement of an impression or judgment about a person, event, etc. Means something like “for example, it’s possible to say something like this.” Often followed by a statement of overall evaluation.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x49256"><span class="number">2. </span>...というか...というか</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>そんなことを<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>うなんて、<ruby><rb>無神経</rb><rt>む しん けい</rt></ruby>というか、<ruby><rb>馬鹿</rb><rt>ば か</rt></ruby>というか、あきれてものもいえない。</span>／<span class="translation">That he would say something like that makes him either an insensitive clod or an idiot and leaves me utterly speechless.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>行動</rb><rt>こう どう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>大胆</rb><rt>だい たん</rt></ruby>というか、<ruby><rb>無邪気</rb><rt>む じゃ き</rt></ruby>というか、みんなを<ruby><rb>困惑</rb><rt>こん わく</rt></ruby>させた。</span>／<span class="translation">Her actions were bold or perhaps naive, but everyone was baffled by them.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>そのときの<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>表情</rb><rt>ひょう じょう</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>悲壮</rb><rt>ひ そう</rt></ruby>というか、<ruby><rb>雄々</rb><rt>お お</rt></ruby>しいというか、<ruby><rb>言葉</rb><rt>こと ば</rt></ruby>にはしがたいものがあった。</span>／<span class="translation">His expression at the time was somewhere between tragic and dauntless—a little hard to describe in words.  </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>そのほめ<ruby><rb>言葉</rb><rt>こと ば</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>聞</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>いたときのわたしの<ruby><rb>気持</rb><rt>き も</rt></ruby>ちは、うれしいというか、<ruby><rb>恥</rb><rt>は</rt></ruby>ずかしいというか、<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>とも<ruby><rb>説明</rb><rt>せつ めい</rt></ruby>しがたいものだった。</span>／<span class="translation">My feelings at hearing such words of praise were somewhere between happy and embarrassed—it’s really hard to explain.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used for thinking out loud about an impression or opinion of a person or event. Often followed by a statement of overall evaluation.</div></body></html>