<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>いかなる</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0033.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【いがい】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0035.xhtml">【いかに】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x3387">【いかなる】</h1><div class="explanation">Must be followed by a noun. Used in formal written language. In spoken language, どんな is often used instead of いかなる.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x3399"><span class="number">1. </span>いかなるN（+<ruby><rb>助</rb><rt>じょ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>詞</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>）も</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>はいかなる<ruby><rb>困難</rb><rt>こん なん</rt></ruby>にも<ruby><rb>負</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>けないほど<ruby><rb>強</rb><rt>つよ</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>精神力</rb><rt>せい しん りょく</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>持</rb><rt>も</rt></ruby>ち<ruby><rb>主</rb><rt>ぬし</rt></ruby>だった。</span>／<span class="translation">He possessed the strong mental fortitude to overcome any kind of difficulty.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>いかなる<ruby><rb>罰則</rb><rt>ばっ そく</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>暴走族</rb><rt>ぼう そう ぞく</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>取</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>り<ruby><rb>締</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>まりには<ruby><rb>効</rb><rt>こう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>奏</rb><rt>そう</rt></ruby>しなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">Even draconian penal regulations didn’t work well for a crackdown against motorcycle gangs.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>この<ruby><rb>制御</rb><rt>せい ぎょ</rt></ruby>システムは、いかなる<ruby><rb>非常事態</rb><rt>ひ じょう じ たい</rt></ruby>にも<ruby><rb>対応</rb><rt>たい おう</rt></ruby>できるよう<ruby><rb>綿密</rb><rt>めん みつ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>作</rb><rt>つく</rt></ruby>られている。</span>／<span class="translation">This control system is precisely designed to deal with any emergency.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>いかなる<ruby><rb>賞賛</rb><rt>しょう さん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>言葉</rb><rt>こと ば</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>前</rb><rt>まえ</rt></ruby>では<ruby><rb>嘘</rb><rt>うそ</rt></ruby>になってしまうほど、<ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>はすばらしかった。</span>／<span class="translation">She was so wonderful that no words of praise could do her justice.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “the most extreme form of N.” Used to emphasize the certainty of the state or situation expressed by the predicate, by emphasizing N. </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x3436"><span class="number">2. </span>いかなるNでも</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>絵画</rb><rt>かい が</rt></ruby>というのは、いかなる<ruby><rb>作品</rb><rt>さく ひん</rt></ruby>でもそこに<ruby><rb>作者</rb><rt>さく しゃ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>独自</rb><rt>どく じ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>視点</rb><rt>し てん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>反映</rb><rt>はん えい</rt></ruby>されているものだ。</span>／<span class="translation">In pictures, the creator’s individual viewpoint is reflected in any piece of work.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>いかなる<ruby><rb>状況</rb><rt>じょう きょう</rt></ruby>であれ、<ruby><rb>自分</rb><rt>じ ぶん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>職務</rb><rt>しょく む</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>離</rb><rt>はな</rt></ruby>れるのは<ruby><rb>許</rb><rt>ゆる</rt></ruby>されないことだ。</span>／<span class="translation">It is not permissible to abandon one’s duty, no matter what the situation.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>それがいかなる<ruby><rb>方法</rb><rt>ほう ほう</rt></ruby>であれ、それによって<ruby><rb>結果的</rb><rt>けっ か てき</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>多</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>くの<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>助</rb><rt>たす</rt></ruby>かるのならやってみるべきではなかろうか。</span>／<span class="translation">No matter what the method is, if it results in helping many people, shouldn’t it be tried?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>いかなる<ruby><rb>意見</rb><rt>い けん</rt></ruby>であっても、<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>だ</rt></ruby>されたものは<ruby><rb>一応</rb><rt>いち おう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>検討</rb><rt>けん とう</rt></ruby>してみる<ruby><rb>必要</rb><rt>ひつ よう</rt></ruby>があるだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">Whatever the opinions are, it seems necessary to at least consider each one offered. </span></div><div class="explanation">In these cases, いかなる is used in the patterns いかなるNでも／Nであれ／Nであっても, which mean “if it is N, then no matter how extreme or unusual it is.” Prefaces the latter half of a sentence and thus emphasizes the assertion in this half.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x3473"><span class="number">3. </span>いかなる...とも</h2><h4 class="info">［いかなるNであろうとも］</h4><h4 class="info">［いかなるN+助詞+V-ようとも］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>いかなる<ruby><rb>状況</rb><rt>じょう きょう</rt></ruby>になろうとも、<ruby><rb>断固</rb><rt>だん こ</rt></ruby>として<ruby><rb>戦</rb><rt>たたか</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>抜</rb><rt>ぬ</rt></ruby>く<ruby><rb>決意</rb><rt>けつ い</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">I made up my mind to fight it out no matter what became of the situation. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>なら、いかなる<ruby><rb>環境</rb><rt>かん きょう</rt></ruby>におかれようとも<ruby><rb>自</rb><rt>みずか</rt></ruby>らの<ruby><rb>道</rb><rt>みち</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>歩</rb><rt>あゆ</rt></ruby>んで<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>くことができるであろう。</span>／<span class="translation">With him, no matter what kind of environment he’s placed in, he’ll be able to make his own way.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>いかなることがらが<ruby><rb>起</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>きようとも、<ruby><rb>常</rb><rt>つね</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>冷静</rb><rt>れい せい</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>事態</rb><rt>じ たい</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>判断</rb><rt>はん だん</rt></ruby>する<ruby><rb>能力</rb><rt>のう りょく</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>身</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>につけなければならない。</span>／<span class="translation">We have to acquire the ability to coolly judge the situation at all times, whatever may happen. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>いかなる<ruby><rb>役割</rb><rt>やく わり</rt></ruby>であろうとも、<ruby><rb>与</rb><rt>あた</rt></ruby>えられれば<ruby><rb>誠意</rb><rt>せい い</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>尽</rb><rt>つ</rt></ruby>くして<ruby><rb>精</rb><rt>せい</rt></ruby>いっぱいやるのが<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>たちの<ruby><rb>努</rb><rt>つと</rt></ruby>めだ。</span>／<span class="translation">No matter what our role may be, our duty is to do our very best with all sincerity in whatever we are given to do.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “no matter how difficult, extreme, or unusual something is.”</div></body></html>