<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ともなれば</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0634.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ともなると】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0636.xhtml">【ともに】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x59406">【ともなれば】</h1><h4 class="info">［Nともなれば］</h4><h4 class="info">［Vともなれば］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>9<ruby><rb>月</rb><rt>がつ</rt></ruby>ともなれば、<ruby><rb>真夏</rb><rt>ま なつ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>暑</rb><rt>あつ</rt></ruby>さはなくなり<ruby><rb>過</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>ごしやすくなる。</span>／<span class="translation">Once September comes, the summer heat is over and the weather is more comfortable.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>も 10 <ruby><rb>歳</rb><rt>さい</rt></ruby>ともなればもう<ruby><rb>少</rb><rt>すこ</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>物分</rb><rt>もの わ</rt></ruby>かりがよくてもいいはずだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Once a child is ten, she should be a little more perceptive.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>結婚式</rb><rt>けっ こん しき</rt></ruby>ともなればジーパンではまずいだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">When it comes to a wedding ceremony, it’s not appropriate to wear jeans.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>主婦</rb><rt>しゅ ふ</rt></ruby>ともなれば<ruby><rb>朝寝坊</rb><rt>あさ ね ぼう</rt></ruby>してはいられない。</span>／<span class="translation">If you’re a homemaker, you can’t sleep in in the morning.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>学長</rb><rt>がく ちょう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>就任</rb><rt>しゅう にん</rt></ruby>するともなれば、<ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>までのようにのんびり<ruby><rb>研究</rb><rt>けん きゅう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>打</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>ち<ruby><rb>込</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>んではいられなくなる。</span>／<span class="translation">Once you assume the presidency of the university, you won’t be able to focus freely and easily on your research, as you have until now.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used with a noun or a verb referring to time, age, a role or an event, ともなれば means “if/when such a thing or event is realized.” It is followed by an expression indicating the speaker’s judgment that if such a change in situation takes place, a certain consequence will naturally follow. ともなると can also be used instead of ともなれば.</div></body></html>