<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>にあって</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0744.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【にあたり】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0746.xhtml">【にいたる】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x69646">【にあって】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x69648"><span class="number">1. </span>Nにあって</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>異国</rb><rt>い こく</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>地</rb><rt>ち</rt></ruby>にあって、<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>探</rb><rt>さが</rt></ruby>すこともままならない。</span>／<span class="translation">Being in a foreign country, it isn’t easy looking for a job.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>住民</rb><rt>じゅう みん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>代表</rb><rt>だい ひょう</rt></ruby>という<ruby><rb>立場</rb><rt>たち ば</rt></ruby>にあって、<ruby><rb>寝</rb><rt>ね</rt></ruby>る<ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>惜</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>しんでその<ruby><rb>問題</rb><rt>もん だい</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>取</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>り<ruby><rb>組</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>んでいる。</span>／<span class="translation">As a representative of the residents, I am tackling the problem sparing little time for sleep.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>大臣</rb><rt>だい じん</rt></ruby>という<ruby><rb>職</rb><rt>しょく</rt></ruby>にあって、<ruby><rb>不正</rb><rt>ふ せい</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>働</rb><rt>はたら</rt></ruby>いていたとは<ruby><rb>許</rb><rt>ゆる</rt></ruby>せない。</span>／<span class="translation">For someone in the position of a minister, committing an injustice is inexcusable.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>母</rb><rt>はは</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>病床</rb><rt>びょう しょう</rt></ruby>にあって、なおも<ruby><rb>子供達</rb><rt>こ ども たち</rt></ruby>のことを<ruby><rb>気</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>にかけている。</span>／<span class="translation">Even from her sickbed, my mother is caring for her children.</span></div><div class="explanation">With a noun, expresses the meaning of “under the circumstance mentioned in the noun.” The relationship between the circumstance and the thing/state/event stated in the following is not always fixed. Depending on the contexts before and after the expression, it can be adversative or sequential. The sentences in (1) and (2) are adversative examples, whereas those in (3) and (4) are sequential examples. にあって in (3) and (4) means “even in the circumstance/although under the circumstance.” </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x69685"><span class="number">2. </span>Nにあっても</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>苦境</rb><rt>く きょう</rt></ruby>にあっても、めげずに<ruby><rb>頑張</rb><rt>がん ば</rt></ruby>っている。</span>／<span class="translation">Even with hardships, he’s doing his best without giving up.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>暖</rb><rt>あたた</rt></ruby>かい<ruby><rb>家庭</rb><rt>か てい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>中</rb><rt>なか</rt></ruby>にあっても、<ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>心</rb><rt>こころ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>満</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>たされなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">Even with her warmhearted family, she felt dissatisfied.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>母</rb><rt>はは</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>死</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>間際</rb><rt>ま ぎわ</rt></ruby>にあっても、<ruby><rb>子供達</rb><rt>こ ども たち</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>幸福</rb><rt>こう ふく</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>願</rb><rt>ねが</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>続</rb><rt>つづ</rt></ruby>けた。</span>／<span class="translation">Even on her deathbed, the mother kept wishing for her children’s happiness.</span></div><div class="explanation">With a noun, expresses the meaning of “even under the circumstances stated in the noun.” Followed by some state/event which contradicts what can normally be expected under such circumstances. A formal, written expression.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x69719"><span class="number">3. </span>Nにあっては〈circumstances〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>こんな<ruby><rb>厳寒</rb><rt>げん かん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>地</rb><rt>ち</rt></ruby>にあっては、<ruby><rb>新鮮</rb><rt>しん せん</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>野菜</rb><rt>や さい</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>食卓</rb><rt>しょく たく</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>あが</rt></ruby>るなど、<ruby><rb>滅多</rb><rt>めっ た</rt></ruby>にないことだ。</span>／<span class="translation">In such a bitterly cold place, it’s rare for fresh vegetables to make it to the table.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>いつ<ruby><rb>戦争</rb><rt>せん そう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>起</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>こるか<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>れない<ruby><rb>状況</rb><rt>じょう きょう</rt></ruby>にあっては、<ruby><rb>明</rb><rt>あか</rt></ruby>るい<ruby><rb>未来</rb><rt>み らい</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>描</rb><rt>えが</rt></ruby>くことなどできない。</span>／<span class="translation">In a situation where one never knows when a war might break out, it’s difficult to imagine a bright future.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>夫</rb><rt>おっと</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>病床</rb><rt>びょう しょう</rt></ruby>にあっては、<ruby><rb>子供達</rb><rt>こ ども たち</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>十分</rb><rt>じゅう ぶん</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>教育</rb><rt>きょう いく</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>受</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>けさせることもできなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">Since my husband was ill in bed, I couldn’t have my children receive an adequate education.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>わが<ruby><rb>社</rb><rt>しゃ</rt></ruby>にあっては、<ruby><rb>若者</rb><rt>わか もの</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>自由</rb><rt>じ ゆう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>発言</rb><rt>はつ げん</rt></ruby>できる<ruby><rb>雰囲気</rb><rt>ふん い き</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>大切</rb><rt>たい せつ</rt></ruby>にしている。</span>／<span class="translation">In our company, we value an atmosphere in which young employees can speak out freely.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>「<ruby><rb>鉄</rb><rt>てつ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>女</rb><rt>おんな</rt></ruby>」といわれた<ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>家庭</rb><rt>か てい</rt></ruby>にあっては<ruby><rb>良</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>母</rb><rt>はは</rt></ruby>であった。</span>／<span class="translation">Even the woman called “the Iron Lady” was a good mother at home.</span></div><div class="explanation">With a noun expressing a place or circumstances, expresses the meaning of “under the circumstances stated in the sentence.” This is similar to ...において. When an expression which shows some difficult situation, such as 厳寒の地 (bitterly cold place) or 病床(sickbed) is used with にあっては, expressions of some unfavorable circumstances follow. If this is not the case, にあっては simply expresses the meaning of “at, in, as for” as shown in (4) and (5). This is a formal, written expression.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x69765"><span class="number">4. </span>Nにあっては〈person〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>高橋</rb><rt>たか はし</rt></ruby>さんにあっては、どんな<ruby><rb>強敵</rb><rt>きょう てき</rt></ruby>でも<ruby><rb>勝</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>てそうにありませんね。</span>／<span class="translation">When it comes to Takahashi-san, she can’t lose no matter how strong her opponent is.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>あの<ruby><rb>男</rb><rt>おとこ</rt></ruby>にあっては、<ruby><rb>嘘</rb><rt>うそ</rt></ruby>もまことと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>いくるめられる。<ruby><rb>油断</rb><rt>ゆ だん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>禁物</rb><rt>きん もつ</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">Talking about that man, he can wheedle you into believing his lies. You don’t dare let down your guard.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>あなたにあってはかなわないな。しょうがない。お<ruby><rb>望</rb><rt>のぞ</rt></ruby>み<ruby><rb>通</rb><rt>どお</rt></ruby>りに<ruby><rb>致</rb><rt>いた</rt></ruby>しましょう。</span>／<span class="translation">No one can get the better of you. OK, OK. I’ll do what you want.</span></div><div class="explanation">With a noun expressing a person, used to assess the person who cannot be beaten by anybody else. The sentence in (3) is uttered when the speaker cannot decline the listener’s adroit invitation or assertive demand, and may contain a slight shade of meaning that the speaker is teasing the hearer. にあっては can be rephrased with ...にかかっては.</div></body></html>