<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>となると</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0608.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【となる】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0610.xhtml">【となれば】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x57674">【となると】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x57676"><span class="number">1. </span>となると</h2><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>先生</rb><rt>せん せい</rt></ruby>はご<ruby><rb>病気</rb><rt>びょう き</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>昨日</rb><rt>きのう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>入院</rb><rt>にゅう いん</rt></ruby>されました。</span>／<span class="translation">The professor was hospitalized yesterday because of illness.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>となると、しばらく<ruby><rb>授業</rb><rt>じゅ ぎょう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>休講</rb><rt>きゅう こう</rt></ruby>ということになりますね。</span>／<span class="translation">If that’s so, then our lessons will probably be canceled for a while, right?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>長期</rb><rt>ちょう き</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>予報</rb><rt>よ ほう</rt></ruby>によれば<ruby><rb>今年</rb><rt>ことし</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>梅雨</rb><rt>つ ゆ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>空梅雨</rb><rt>から つ ゆ</rt></ruby>になるとのことだ。となると、<ruby><rb>野菜</rb><rt>や さい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>値段</rb><rt>ね だん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>高騰</rb><rt>こう とう</rt></ruby>や、<ruby><rb>水不足</rb><rt>みず ぶ そく</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>心配</rb><rt>しん ぱい</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>予想</rb><rt>よ そう</rt></ruby>される。</span>／<span class="translation">The long range forecast says that this year’s rainy season will be a dry one.  In that case, steep increases in the price of vegetables and concerns about water shortages can be expected.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used in the sentence-initial position and expresses the meaning “based on that reality.” The first clause is either something that the speaker has newly learned about or something mentioned by someone else. The second clause contains the opinion that the speaker arrives at based on that information.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x57713"><span class="number">2. </span>...となると</h2><h4 class="info">［N／Na　（だ）となると］</h4><h4 class="info">［A／V　となると］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>医学部</rb><rt>い がく ぶ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>進</rb><rt>すす</rt></ruby>むとなると<ruby><rb>相当</rb><rt>そう とう</rt></ruby>にお<ruby><rb>金</rb><rt>かね</rt></ruby>がかかるだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">Proceeding on to medical school will likely cost a considerable amount of money.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>決断</rb><rt>けつ だん</rt></ruby>するまでは<ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby>がかかるが、やるとなると<ruby><rb>実行</rb><rt>じっ こう</rt></ruby>するのは<ruby><rb>早</rb><rt>はや</rt></ruby>い。</span>／<span class="translation">For him, it takes a long time to make a decision, but when he does take action, he moves on it quickly.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>いざ、<ruby><rb>海外</rb><rt>かい がい</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>くとなると、<ruby><rb>事前</rb><rt>じ ぜん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>準備</rb><rt>じゅん び</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>大変</rb><rt>たい へん</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">If sometime you do go overseas, the preparations beforehand are considerable.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>仮</rb><rt>かり</rt></ruby>に、このまま<ruby><rb>水不足</rb><rt>みず ぶ そく</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>続</rb><rt>つづ</rt></ruby>くとなると<ruby><rb>営業時間</rb><rt>えい ぎょう じ かん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>短縮</rb><rt>たん しゅく</rt></ruby>しなければならなくなる。</span>／<span class="translation">Should the current water shortage continue like this, we may have to shorten our hours of operation.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>この<ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby>になっても<ruby><rb>帰</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>っていないとなると、<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なに</rt></ruby>かの<ruby><rb>事件</rb><rt>じ けん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>巻</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>込</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>まれている<ruby><rb>可能性</rb><rt>か のう せい</rt></ruby>がある。</span>／<span class="translation">When she still hasn’t come home at this late hour, there’s a possibility that she’s been involved in some incident.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>現場</rb><rt>げん ば</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>残</rb><rt>のこ</rt></ruby>された<ruby><rb>指紋</rb><rt>し もん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>のものと<ruby><rb>一致</rb><rt>いっ ち</rt></ruby>するとなると、<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>犯人</rb><rt>はん にん</rt></ruby>である<ruby><rb>公算</rb><rt>こう さん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>高</rb><rt>たか</rt></ruby>い。</span>／<span class="translation">If his fingerprints match those left at the scene, there’s a high probability that he’s the criminal.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（7）</span>これほど<ruby><rb>大企業</rb><rt>だい き ぎょう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>経営</rb><rt>けい えい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>状態</rb><rt>じょう たい</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>悪</rb><rt>わる</rt></ruby>いとなると、<ruby><rb>不況</rb><rt>ふ きょう</rt></ruby>はかなり<ruby><rb>深刻</rb><rt>しん こく</rt></ruby>ということになる。</span>／<span class="translation">When the operations of a large corporation are as bad as this, the recession can be said to be rather serious.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（8）</span><ruby><rb>社長</rb><rt>しゃ ちょう</rt></ruby>がそう<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>っているとなると、<ruby><rb>変更</rb><rt>へん こう</rt></ruby>はほとんど<ruby><rb>不可能</rb><rt>ふ か のう</rt></ruby>でしょう。</span>／<span class="translation">If the company president said something like that, any revision is almost impossible. </span></div><div class="explanation">Follows a clause to express the meanings “in such a case” or “when such a case arises.” Depending on the context, it can be used to talk about an actual situation or an assumed one. For a hypothetical situation, expressions such as もし／かりに are used.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x57778"><span class="number">3. </span>いざとなると</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>危険</rb><rt>き けん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>承知</rb><rt>しょう ち</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>手術</rb><rt>しゅ じゅつ</rt></ruby>だが、いざとなると<ruby><rb>不安</rb><rt>ふ あん</rt></ruby>になるものだ。</span>／<span class="translation">There’s expected risk in any surgery, but when it actually happens, we get uneasy.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>スピーチは<ruby><rb>原稿</rb><rt>げん こう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>何度</rb><rt>なん ど</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>読</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>んで<ruby><rb>練習</rb><rt>れん しゅう</rt></ruby>してきたが、いざとなるとあがってしまい、うまくしゃべれなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">I reviewed the manuscript over and over and practiced the speech, but when it came time to do it, I got a bad case of nerves and couldn’t deliver it well.</span></div><div class="explanation">An idiomatic expression with the meaning “in the case of actually implementing (something).” The second clause often continues with an expression to show that the outcome was a natural result of the situation.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x57803"><span class="number">4. </span>N（のこと）となると</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>芸能人</rb><rt>げい のう じん</rt></ruby>のスキャンダルとなると、マスコミは<ruby><rb>夢中</rb><rt>む ちゅう</rt></ruby>になって<ruby><rb>追跡</rb><rt>つい せき</rt></ruby>する。</span>／<span class="translation">When it comes to a celebrity scandal, the mass media pursue it relentlessly.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>試験</rb><rt>し けん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>問題</rb><rt>もん だい</rt></ruby>のこととなると<ruby><rb>学生</rb><rt>がく せい</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>急</rb><rt>きゅう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>真剣</rb><rt>しん けん</rt></ruby>になる。</span>／<span class="translation">When the lesson turns to a possible exam question, the students suddenly get serious.</span></div><div class="explanation">Follows a noun to express the meaning “at the time that the matter becomes an issue/problem.” The latter half of the sentence continues with an expression to show that an attitude contrary to the usual one is taken when the issue arises.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x57828"><span class="number">5. </span>...かとなると</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>どうすればこの<ruby><rb>問題</rb><rt>もん だい</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>解決</rb><rt>かい けつ</rt></ruby>できるかとなると、<ruby><rb>簡単</rb><rt>かん たん</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>答</rb><rt>こた</rt></ruby>えられない。</span>／<span class="translation">If I am asked what to do to solve this problem, I can’t give a simple answer.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>実際</rb><rt>じっ さい</rt></ruby>にだれがその<ruby><rb>危険</rb><rt>き けん</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>にあたるかとなると、<ruby><rb>積極的</rb><rt>せっ きょく てき</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>一人</rb><rt>ひとり</rt></ruby>もいない。</span>／<span class="translation">If you want to know who actually is to undertake such a risky task, there’s not a single person who has come forward.</span></div><div class="explanation">Follows a query to express the meaning “when this becomes a problem.” The latter half follows with a negative expression to show that the solution or implementation is impossible or challenging.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x57853"><span class="number">6. </span>Nともなると<span class="reference">→<a href="part0634.xhtml#idtitlex1x59378">【ともなると】</a></span></h2></body></html>