<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>じょう</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0281.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【しゅんかん】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0283.xhtml">【しょうがない】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x22145">【じょう】</h1><h4 class="info">［Nじょう］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>にお<ruby><rb>金</rb><rt>かね</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>与</rb><rt>あた</rt></ruby>えるのは<ruby><rb>教育上</rb><rt>きょう いく じょう</rt></ruby>よくない。</span>／<span class="translation">From the point of view of education, it’s not good to give money to children.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>サービス<ruby><rb>業</rb><rt>ぎょう</rt></ruby>という<ruby><rb>仕事上</rb><rt>し ごと じょう</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>休</rb><rt>やす</rt></ruby>みの<ruby><rb>時</rb><rt>とき</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>休</rb><rt>やす</rt></ruby>むわけにはいかない。</span>／<span class="translation">A job in the service sector means that you can’t have days off when other people do. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>安全上</rb><rt>あん ぜん じょう</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>作業中</rb><rt>さ ぎょう ちゅう</rt></ruby>はヘルメットを<ruby><rb>必</rb><rt>かなら</rt></ruby>ずかぶること。</span>／<span class="translation">For safety reasons, you are always required to wear a helmet when working. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>経験上</rb><rt>けい けん じょう</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>練習</rb><rt>れん しゅう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>三日</rb><rt>みっか</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>休</rb><rt>やす</rt></ruby>むと<ruby><rb>体</rb><rt>からだ</rt></ruby>がついていかなくなる。</span>／<span class="translation">From my experience, if you miss three days of training, your body can’t keep up. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>立場上</rb><rt>たち ば じょう</rt></ruby>、その<ruby><rb>質問</rb><rt>しつ もん</rt></ruby>にはお<ruby><rb>答</rb><rt>こた</rt></ruby>えできません。</span>／<span class="translation">My position does not allow me to answer that question. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>図書</rb><rt>と しょ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>整理</rb><rt>せい り</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>都合上</rb><rt>つ ごう じょう</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>当分</rb><rt>とう ぶん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>間</rb><rt>あいだ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>閉館</rb><rt>へい かん</rt></ruby>します。</span>／<span class="translation">The library will be closed temporarily for cataloguing.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “from that point of view” or “regarding that point.” (6) can be replaced by 都合により (because of). A formal expression.</div></body></html>