<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>たいがい</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0361.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【だい】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0363.xhtml">【たいした】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x28600">【たいがい】</h1><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>あの<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>は、たいがい9<ruby><rb>時</rb><rt>じ</rt></ruby>ごろ<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>ます。8<ruby><rb>時</rb><rt>じ</rt></ruby>ごろの<ruby><rb>時</rb><rt>とき</rt></ruby>もありますが。</span>／<span class="translation">That person usually arrives at around nine o’clock... but sometimes at eight or so.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>朝食</rb><rt>ちょう しょく</rt></ruby>は、たいがいパンですね。</span>／<span class="translation">I usually have bread for breakfast.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>そんなに<ruby><rb>遠</rb><rt>とお</rt></ruby>くない<ruby><rb>所</rb><rt>ところ</rt></ruby>なら、たいがいは<ruby><rb>自転車</rb><rt>じ てん しゃ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>使</rb><rt>つか</rt></ruby>うことにしています。</span>／<span class="translation">If I’m going somewhere that’s not so far away, I generally try to use my bicycle.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>試験</rb><rt>し けん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>成績</rb><rt>せい せき</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>悪</rb><rt>わる</rt></ruby>かった<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>は、たいがいの<ruby><rb>場合</rb><rt>ば あい</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>追試</rb><rt>つい し</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>受</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>けることになっています。</span>／<span class="translation">In most cases, students who get a bad score are expected to take a make-up exam.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used with respect to habitual activities, to express that their frequency or likelihood is high. May also be used in the forms たいがいは and たいがいの場合（は）. Cannot be used to make a conjecture about the future.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>今晩はたいがい7時には帰るでしょう。／He’ll usually be back at seven o’clock tonight.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>今晩はおそらく7時には帰るでしょう。／He’ll probably be back at seven o’clock tonight.</div><div class="explanation">When used in the form たいがいのN, as in たいがいの人 (most people) or たいがいの町 (most towns), it means that the proportion of something is high, and it can be replaced by 大部分のN (the majority of N). たいてい (most) can also be used.</div></body></html>