<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>につれて</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0809.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【につけ】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0811.xhtml">【にて】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x73059">【につれて】</h1><h4 class="info">［Nにつれて］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-るにつれて］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>町</rb><rt>まち</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>発展</rb><rt>はっ てん</rt></ruby>につれて、<ruby><rb>前</rb><rt>まえ</rt></ruby>になかった<ruby><rb>新</rb><rt>あたら</rt></ruby>しい<ruby><rb>問題</rb><rt>もん だい</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>生</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>まれて<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>た。</span>／<span class="translation">With the development of the town, new problems we had never encountered have emerged. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby>がたつにつれて、<ruby><rb>悲</rb><rt>かな</rt></ruby>しみは<ruby><rb>薄</rb><rt>うす</rt></ruby>らいできた。</span>／<span class="translation">As time passed, my sadness has faded. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>設備</rb><rt>せつ び</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>古</rb><rt>ふる</rt></ruby>くなるにつれて、<ruby><rb>故障</rb><rt>こ しょう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>箇所</rb><rt>か しょ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>増</rb><rt>ふ</rt></ruby>えて<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>た。</span>／<span class="translation">As the facilities got older, more things have broken down.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>試合</rb><rt>し あい</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>進</rb><rt>すす</rt></ruby>むにつれて、<ruby><rb>観衆</rb><rt>かん しゅう</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>興奮</rb><rt>こう ふん</rt></ruby>してきて<ruby><rb>大騒</rb><rt>おお さわ</rt></ruby>ぎとなった。</span>／<span class="translation">As the match went on, the gallery got excited and burst into cheers.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>成長</rb><rt>せい ちょう</rt></ruby>するにつれて、<ruby><rb>娘</rb><rt>むすめ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>無口</rb><rt>む くち</rt></ruby>になってきた。</span>／<span class="translation">As she grew up, my daughter turned quiet.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses an approximate proportionate relation in which as a matter or situation develops, another also develops. Can be につれ in formal, written Japanese.</div></body></html>