<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>にかけて</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0759.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【にかけたら】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0761.xhtml">【にかこつけて】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x70490">【にかけて】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x70492"><span class="number">1. </span>NからNにかけて</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>台風</rb><rt>たい ふう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>今晩</rb><rt>こん ばん</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>明日</rb><rt>あ す</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>朝</rb><rt>あさ</rt></ruby>にかけて<ruby><rb>上陸</rb><rt>じょう りく</rt></ruby>するもようです。</span>／<span class="translation">The typhoon will probably hit land some time between tonight and tomorrow morning.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>今月</rb><rt>こん げつ</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>来月</rb><rt>らい げつ</rt></ruby>にかけて<ruby><rb>休暇</rb><rt>きゅう か</rt></ruby>をとるつもりだ。</span>／<span class="translation">I intend to take a holiday from this month to next month.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>北陸</rb><rt>ほく りく</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>東北</rb><rt>とう ほく</rt></ruby>にかけての<ruby><rb>一帯</rb><rt>いっ たい</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>大雪</rb><rt>おお ゆき</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>被害</rb><rt>ひ がい</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>見舞</rb><rt>み ま</rt></ruby>われた。</span>／<span class="translation">They were hard hit by a heavy snow throughout the Hokuriku and Tohoku districts.</span></div><div class="explanation">With a noun expressing a place or time, means “between/over the two places or times.” When it indicates time, there are two cases. One is that にかけて refers to a particular moment between the two, as shown in (1), and the other is that it refers to the time over the two, as shown in (2). にかけて has uses similar to those for ...から...まで(に). However, にかけて is used when the speaker is not overly concerned with the time or space between or over the two mentioned in the sentence or about clearly-defined boundaries.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x70523"><span class="number">2. </span>Nにかけて</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>話術</rb><rt>わ じゅつ</rt></ruby>にかけては<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>右</rb><rt>みぎ</rt></ruby>にでるものはいない。</span>／<span class="translation">No one can match him in story-telling.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>忍耐力</rb><rt>にん たい りょく</rt></ruby>にかけては<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>より<ruby><rb>優</rb><rt>すぐ</rt></ruby>れているという<ruby><rb>自信</rb><rt>じ しん</rt></ruby>がある。</span>／<span class="translation">I have confidence that I surpass all others in patience. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>誠実</rb><rt>せい じつ</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>男</rb><rt>おとこ</rt></ruby>だが、<ruby><rb>商売</rb><rt>しょう ばい</rt></ruby>にかけての<ruby><rb>才能</rb><rt>さい のう</rt></ruby>はあまり<ruby><rb>期待</rb><rt>き たい</rt></ruby>できない。</span>／<span class="translation">He is a man of sincerity, but when it comes to his business ability, he doesn’t meet our expectations. </span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses the meaning of “concerning something.” Often followed by an expression to state some evaluation for a skill or ability. Becomes NにかけてのN, as shown in (3), when modifying a noun.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x70554"><span class="number">3. </span>Nにかけて（も）</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>命</rb><rt>いのち</rt></ruby>にかけてもこの<ruby><rb>秘密</rb><rt>ひ みつ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>守</rb><rt>まも</rt></ruby>り<ruby><rb>通</rb><rt>とお</rt></ruby>す。</span>／<span class="translation">I pledge my life to keep this secret. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>命</rb><rt>いのち</rt></ruby>にかけて、<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>らを<ruby><rb>助</rb><rt>たす</rt></ruby>け<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>だ</rt></ruby>してみせます。</span>／<span class="translation">I pledge my life to save them.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>面子</rb><rt>めんつ</rt></ruby>にかけても<ruby><rb>約束</rb><rt>やく そく</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>守</rb><rt>まも</rt></ruby>る。</span>／<span class="translation">On my honor, I will keep my promise.</span></div><div class="explanation">An idiomatic expression. With a noun expressing something which assures someone’s existence or value socially, such as 命 (life), 名誉 (honor), 信用 (trust) or 面子 (face), used to express the speaker’s firm determination and means “even if it is risked” or “at all costs.” Followed by an expression showing the speaker’s determination or promise. </div></body></html>