<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ように3</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part1031.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ように<sub class="variation">2</sub>】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part1033.xhtml">【ようやく】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x103405">【ように<sub class="variation">3</sub>】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x103411"><span class="number">1. </span>V-る／V-ない　よう（に）〈purpose〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>後</rb><rt>うし</rt></ruby>ろの<ruby><rb>席</rb><rt>せき</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>にも<ruby><rb>聞</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>こえるように<ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>きな<ruby><rb>声</rb><rt>こえ</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はな</rt></ruby>した。</span>／<span class="translation">I said it in a loud enough voice so that even the people in the seats behind could hear it.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>にも<ruby><rb>読</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>めるよう<ruby><rb>名前</rb><rt>な まえ</rt></ruby>にふりがなをつけた。</span>／<span class="translation">I put my name in <i>furigana</i> so that even children would be able to read it.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>赤</rb><rt>あか</rt></ruby>ん<ruby><rb>坊</rb><rt>ぼう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>起</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>こさないようにそっと<ruby><rb>布団</rb><rt>ふ とん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>た。</span>／<span class="translation">I got out of the <i>futon</i> softly, so as not to wake the baby.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>忘</rb><rt>わす</rt></ruby>れないようにノートにメモしておこう。</span>／<span class="translation">I will make a note of this so I won’t forget.</span></div><div class="explanation">Using a verb before and after, this means “do... so as to make such a circumstance or situation occur/do... so as not to....”に is sometimes omitted. Before ように, verbs which show non-volitional actions, such as なる and できる, or verbs which show possibility in the form V-れる are often used, as are the negative forms of verbs and expressions which show the state or condition of a thing. The clause which follows ように is a verb which demonstrates the speaker’s intentional act. The subject may differ before and after, as in examples (1)-(3), or it may be the same, as in (4).</div><div class="explanation">Furthermore, in cases where the subject is the same before and after, and where the first verb demonstrates an intentional action, it is usual to use ために.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>息子が家で仕事ができるために父親は家を改築した。（異主語･非意志的）／So that his son could work from home, the father renovated the house. (different subject, non-volitional)</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>息子が家で仕事ができるように父親は家を改築した。（異主語･非意志的）／So that his son could work from home, the father renovated the house. (different subject, non-volitional)</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>家で仕事をするために家を改築した。（同一主語・意志的）／He renovated the house so he could work from home. (same subject, volitional)</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x103494"><span class="number">2. </span>V-る／V-ない　よう（に）〈admonition〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>忘</rb><rt>わす</rt></ruby>れ<ruby><rb>物</rb><rt>もの</rt></ruby>をしないようにしてください。</span>／<span class="translation">Don’t leave anything behind.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>時間内</rb><rt>じ かん ない</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>終了</rb><rt>しゅう りょう</rt></ruby>するようお<ruby><rb>願</rb><rt>ねが</rt></ruby>いします。</span>／<span class="translation">Please finish within the time (allowed).</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>風邪</rb><rt>か ぜ</rt></ruby>をひかないようご<ruby><rb>注意</rb><rt>ちゅう い</rt></ruby>ください。</span>／<span class="translation">Please take care not to catch a cold.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>私語</rb><rt>し ご</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>慎</rb><rt>つつし</rt></ruby>むようにしなさい。</span>／<span class="translation">Please refrain from whispering amongst yourselves.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>集合</rb><rt>しゅうごう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>守</rb><rt>まも</rt></ruby>るように。</span>／<span class="translation">Keep to the appointed time.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>授業中</rb><rt>じゅ ぎょう ちゅう</rt></ruby>はおしゃべりしないように。</span>／<span class="translation">No chatting during class.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to give advice to or to remonstrate with the listener. Verbs such as しなさい／してください and お願いします are used in the latter half but are sometimes omitted, in which case the expression ends with ように. Also, it is possible to omit the に from ように but, where the sentence ends with ように, it is usual not to do so, as in examples (5) and (6). Used in the form V-ないように, this often expresses negative advice or recommendations.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x103546"><span class="number">3. </span>V-る／V-ない　よう（に）〈prayer〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>息子</rb><rt>むすこ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>大学</rb><rt>だい がく</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>合格</rb><rt>ごう かく</rt></ruby>できるよう<ruby><rb>神</rb><rt>かみ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>祈</rb><rt>いの</rt></ruby>った。</span>／<span class="translation">I prayed to God that my son would pass the university entrance exam.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>現状</rb><rt>げん じょう</rt></ruby>がさらに<ruby><rb>改善</rb><rt>かい ぜん</rt></ruby>されるよう<ruby><rb>期待</rb><rt>き たい</rt></ruby>している。</span>／<span class="translation">I hope that the present situation will improve again.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>《<ruby><rb>年賀状</rb><rt>ねん が じょう</rt></ruby>》<ruby><rb>新</rb><rt>あたら</rt></ruby>しい<ruby><rb>年</rb><rt>とし</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>幸</rb><rt>さいわ</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>多</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>年</rb><rt>とし</rt></ruby>でありますよう<ruby><rb>祈</rb><rt>いの</rt></ruby>っております。</span>／<span class="translation">《New Year’s card》Wishing you a joyful new year.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>《<ruby><rb>病気</rb><rt>びょう き</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>見舞</rb><rt>み まい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>手紙</rb><rt>て がみ</rt></ruby>》<ruby><rb>早</rb><rt>はや</rt></ruby>く<ruby><rb>全快</rb><rt>ぜん かい</rt></ruby>なさいますよう、<ruby><rb>祈念</rb><rt>き ねん</rt></ruby>いたしております。</span>／<span class="translation">《get-well card》I am praying for your swift and complete recovery.　</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>どうか<ruby><rb>合格</rb><rt>ごう かく</rt></ruby>できますように。</span>／<span class="translation">Wishing you success in the (e.g. entrance) exams.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span>すべてがうまくいきますよう。</span>／<span class="translation">Hoping all goes well.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（7）</span>あしたは<ruby><rb>雨</rb><rt>あめ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>降</rb><rt>ふ</rt></ruby>りませんように。</span>／<span class="translation">Praying that it does not rain tomorrow.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses one’s or another’s hopes, prayers and wishes. Verbs such as 祈る(pray), 祈念する(say a prayer), 念じる(pray silently), 望む(desire), 願う(wish), 希望する(hope) and 期待する(expect) are used after ように. As in examples (5) and (6), the expression can end with ように. In such cases the polite form is usually used before ように. It is often used to bring a speech or letter to a close.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x103601"><span class="number">4. </span>V-る／V-ない　よう（に）いう</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>すぐ<ruby><rb>家</rb><rt>いえ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>帰</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>るように<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>われました。</span>／<span class="translation">I was told to go home at once.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>これからは<ruby><rb>遅刻</rb><rt>ち こく</rt></ruby>しないように<ruby><rb>注意</rb><rt>ちゅう い</rt></ruby>しておきました。</span>／<span class="translation">I warned them not to be late from now on.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>戻</rb><rt>もど</rt></ruby>りましたら、<ruby><rb>家</rb><rt>いえ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>電話</rb><rt>でん わ</rt></ruby>するようお<ruby><rb>伝</rb><rt>つた</rt></ruby>えください。</span>／<span class="translation">Please tell him to call me at home when he comes back (to the office).　</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>隣</rb><rt>となり</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>に、ステレオの<ruby><rb>音量</rb><rt>おん りょう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>下</rb><rt>さ</rt></ruby>げてもらうように<ruby><rb>頼</rb><rt>たの</rt></ruby>んだ。</span>／<span class="translation">I asked my neighbor to turn the volume of her stereo down.</span></div><div class="explanation">Using verbs of communication, such as 言う(say) and 伝える(convey) in the latter half, this is used to indirectly quote a request. Direct quotations take the following form: command/request+と+verb of communication. </div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>「すぐ帰れ」と言った。／She said, “Go home at once.”</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>「ステレオの音量を下げてください」と頼んだ。／I asked, “Please would you turn down the volume of your stereo?”</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x103656"><span class="number">5. </span>V-る／V-ない　ようにする</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>肉</rb><rt>にく</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>小</rb><rt>ちい</rt></ruby>さく<ruby><rb>切</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>って、こどもにも<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べられるようにした。</span>／<span class="translation">I cut the meat into small pieces so that even children could eat it.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>きな<ruby><rb>活字</rb><rt>かつ じ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>使</rb><rt>つか</rt></ruby>い、<ruby><rb>老人</rb><rt>ろう じん</rt></ruby>にも<ruby><rb>読</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>みやすいようにする。</span>／<span class="translation">We use large print so that it’s easy for the elderly to read.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>できるだけ<ruby><rb>英会話</rb><rt>えい かい わ</rt></ruby>のテレビを<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>るようにしている。</span>／<span class="translation">I’m watching as much English conversation program on TV as I possibly can.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>機嫌</rb><rt>き げん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>損</rb><rt>そこ</rt></ruby>ねることは<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>わないようにした。</span>／<span class="translation">I tried not to say things that would hurt her feelings.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>試験日</rb><rt>し けん び</rt></ruby>には、<ruby><rb>目覚</rb><rt>め ざ</rt></ruby>まし<ruby><rb>時計</rb><rt>ど けい</rt></ruby>を2<ruby><rb>台</rb><rt>だい</rt></ruby>セットして<ruby><rb>寝坊</rb><rt>ね ぼう</rt></ruby>しないようにしよう。</span>／<span class="translation">On exams days I set two alarm clocks so that I don’t overlay.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>油</rb><rt>あぶら</rt></ruby>ものは<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べないようにしている。</span>／<span class="translation">I try not to eat fried foods.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means to make efforts with the aim of/to aim to/to see to it that an action or situation occurs. As in examples (4)-(6), when the negative form is used, it means to aim for the action or situation not to occur....ようにしている of (3) and (6) means to do that thing customarily. A verb usually comes before ように but, as in example (2), V-やすい is also used. In this case 読みやすくする could also be used.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x103705"><span class="number">6. </span>V-る／V-ない　ようになる</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>日本語</rb><rt>に ほん ご</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はな</rt></ruby>せるようになりました。</span>／<span class="translation">I have become able to speak Japanese.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>眼鏡</rb><rt>めがね</rt></ruby>をかければ、<ruby><rb>黒板</rb><rt>こく ばん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>字</rb><rt>じ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>えるようになります。</span>／<span class="translation">I can see the letters on the blackboard if I wear my glasses.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>赤</rb><rt>あか</rt></ruby>ちゃんはずいぶん<ruby><rb>活発</rb><rt>かっ ぱつ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>動</rb><rt>うご</rt></ruby>くようになりました。</span>／<span class="translation">The baby has started moving very vigorously.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>隣</rb><rt>となり</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>最近</rb><rt>さい きん</rt></ruby>きちんとあいさつするようになった。</span>／<span class="translation">The neighbor’s child has recently begun to make the proper greetings.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>注意</rb><rt>ちゅう い</rt></ruby>したら<ruby><rb>文句</rb><rt>もん く</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>わないようになった。</span>／<span class="translation">After I had a word, he stopped complaining.</span></div><div class="explanation">Taking the dictionary form of verbs, expresses a change from a situation in which something is not possible to one in which it is, or, from one in which a thing cannot be realized to one in which it can. It is often used to express possibility in the form V-れる, as in example (1). In cases where the negative form is used, as in (5), it expresses a change to a situation in which a thing is not done. In this case 言わなくなった could also be said.</div></body></html>