<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>もしかしたら</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0982.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【もし】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0984.xhtml">【もしくは】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x97188">【もしかしたら】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x97190"><span class="number">1. </span>もしかしたら...かもしれない</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>量</rb><rt>りょう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>減</rb><rt>へ</rt></ruby>ったから、もしかしたらわたしも<ruby><rb>日曜日</rb><rt>にち よう び</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>かけられるかもしれない。</span>／<span class="translation">My workload has lessened and so perhaps I might be able to go out on Sunday.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>はいい<ruby><rb>天気</rb><rt>てん き</rt></ruby>だが、すこし<ruby><rb>雲</rb><rt>くも</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>て<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>たから、もしかしたら<ruby><rb>雨</rb><rt>あめ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>降</rb><rt>ふ</rt></ruby>るかもしれない。</span>／<span class="translation">It is nice weather now, but clouds are gathering and it might rain.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>この<ruby><rb>名刺</rb><rt>めい し</rt></ruby>があれば、もしかしたら、<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>面会</rb><rt>めん かい</rt></ruby>できるかもしれない。</span>／<span class="translation">If I have this business card, perhaps I might be able to meet with him.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>はここ2、3<ruby><rb>日</rb><rt>にち</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>大学</rb><rt>だい がく</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>て<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>ない。もしかしたら<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>病気</rb><rt>びょう き</rt></ruby>かもしれない。</span>／<span class="translation">He hasn’t been to college classes for two or three days. Perhaps he’s sick.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>もしかしたら、<ruby><rb>中田</rb><rt>なか た</rt></ruby>さんが<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>っているかもしれないが、はっきりしたことはまだわからない。</span>／<span class="translation">Perhaps Nakata-san knows, but I’m still really not sure.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span>もしかしたら、<ruby><rb>山川</rb><rt>やま かわ</rt></ruby>さんがその<ruby><rb>本</rb><rt>ほん</rt></ruby>をもっているのではないだろうか。</span>／<span class="translation">Could Yamakawa-san maybe have that book?</span></div><div class="explanation">When accompanied by conjectural phrases such as ...かもしれない and ...のではないだろうか, expresses the supposition that “that too might be possible.” Indicates the speaker’s lack of confidence in <span class="noSeparate">his/her</span> own judgment. もしかすると, もしかして, and ひょっとすると are also used.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x97239"><span class="number">2. </span>もしかしたら...か</h2><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><span class="number">A:</span>あの<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>、もしかしたら、<ruby><rb>山本</rb><rt>やま もと</rt></ruby>さんじゃないですか。</span>／<span class="translation">That person, might it possibly be Yamamoto-san? </span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>ええ。そうですよ。ご<ruby><rb>存</rb><rt>ぞん</rt></ruby>じですか。</span>／<span class="translation">Yes, it is. Do you know her?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>もしかしたら<ruby><rb>事故</rb><rt>じ こ</rt></ruby>にでもあったんじゃない？</span>／<span class="translation">Has there been an accident or something?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>もしかしたら<ruby><rb>今日</rb><rt>きょう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>雨</rb><rt>あめ</rt></ruby>になるのではないだろうか。</span>／<span class="translation">Don’t you think it might turn to rain today?</span></div><div class="explanation">Used with phrases which express a question, such as ...か and じゃない？, demonstrates the speaker’s lack of confidence in <span class="noSeparate">his/her</span> own judgment. もしかすると, もしかして, and ひょっとして are also used.</div></body></html>