<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/>
<link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<title>いじょう</title>
</head>
<body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0042.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【いざしらず】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0044.xhtml">【いずれ<sub class="variation">1</sub>】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>

<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x4471">【いじょう】</h1>
<h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x4473"><span class="number">1. </span><ruby>
<rb>数</rb>
<rt>すう</rt>
</ruby><ruby>
<rb>量</rb>
<rt>りょう</rt>
</ruby><ruby>
<rb>詞</rb>
<rt>し</rt>
</ruby>+いじょう</h2>
<div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby>
<rb>体重</rb>
<rt>たい じゅう</rt>
</ruby>が 45 キロ<ruby>
<rb>以上</rb>
<rt>い じょう</rt>
</ruby>なら<ruby>
<rb>献血</rb>
<rt>けん けつ</rt>
</ruby>できる。</span>／<span class="translation">If your weight is 45 kilograms or more, you can donate blood.</span></div>
<div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>65 <ruby>
<rb>才</rb>
<rt>さい</rt>
</ruby><ruby>
<rb>以上</rb>
<rt>い じょう</rt>
</ruby>の<ruby>
<rb>人</rb>
<rt>ひと</rt>
</ruby>は<ruby>
<rb>入場料</rb>
<rt>にゅう じょう りょう</rt>
</ruby>がただになる。</span>／<span class="translation">Admission is free for persons 65 and older. </span></div>
<div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby>
<rb>夏休</rb>
<rt>なつ やす</rt>
</ruby>みの<ruby>
<rb>間</rb>
<rt>あいだ</rt>
</ruby>に<ruby>
<rb>食文化</rb>
<rt>しょく ぶん か</rt>
</ruby>に<ruby>
<rb>関</rb>
<rt>かん</rt>
</ruby>する<ruby>
<rb>本</rb>
<rt>ほん</rt>
</ruby>を3<ruby>
<rb>冊</rb>
<rt>さつ</rt>
</ruby><ruby>
<rb>以上</rb>
<rt>い じょう</rt>
</ruby><ruby>
<rb>読</rb>
<rt>よ</rt>
</ruby>んでレポートを<ruby>
<rb>書</rb>
<rt>か</rt>
</ruby>きなさい。</span>／<span class="translation">Your summer vacation homework is to read three or more books about food culture and then write a
        report. </span></div>
<div class="explanation">This indicates a number equal to or greater than the figure cited.</div>
<h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x4504"><span class="number">2. </span>いじょう　の／に</h2>
<h3 class="subsubtitle" id="idsubsubtitlex1x4507"><span class="number">a. </span>...いじょうのN</h3>
<h4 class="info">［N／V　いじょうのN］</h4>
<div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby>
<rb>自分</rb>
<rt>じ ぶん</rt>
</ruby>の<ruby>
<rb>能力</rb>
<rt>のう りょく</rt>
</ruby><ruby>
<rb>以上</rb>
<rt>い じょう</rt>
</ruby>の<ruby>
<rb>仕事</rb>
<rt>し ごと</rt>
</ruby>を<ruby>
<rb>与</rb>
<rt>あた</rt>
</ruby>えられるのは<ruby>
<rb>悪</rb>
<rt>わる</rt>
</ruby>いことではない。</span>／<span class="translation">It’s not a bad thing to be given a task which exceeds one’s ability.</span></div>
<div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>その<ruby>
<rb>薬</rb>
<rt>くすり</rt>
</ruby>は<ruby>
<rb>期待</rb>
<rt>き たい</rt>
</ruby><ruby>
<rb>以上</rb>
<rt>い じょう</rt>
</ruby>の<ruby>
<rb>効果</rb>
<rt>こう か</rt>
</ruby>をもたらした。</span>／<span class="translation">This medicine was more effective than I’d expected. </span></div>
<div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby>
<rb>彼</rb>
<rt>かれ</rt>
</ruby>はみんなが<ruby>
<rb>期待</rb>
<rt>き たい</rt>
</ruby>している<ruby>
<rb>以上</rb>
<rt>い じょう</rt>
</ruby>の<ruby>
<rb>働</rb>
<rt>はたら</rt>
</ruby>きをきっとしてくれる<ruby>
<rb>人</rb>
<rt>ひと</rt>
</ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">He’s a person who will surely work even more than what everyone expects.</span></div>
<div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>これ<ruby>
<rb>以上</rb>
<rt>い じょう</rt>
</ruby>のことは<ruby>
<rb>今</rb>
<rt>いま</rt>
</ruby>はお<ruby>
<rb>話</rb>
<rt>はな</rt>
</ruby>しできません。</span>／<span class="translation">I cannot tell you any more at the moment.</span></div>
<div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby>
<rb>落</rb>
<rt>お</rt>
</ruby>ち<ruby>
<rb>込</rb>
<rt>こ</rt>
</ruby>んでいる<ruby>
<rb>友達</rb>
<rt>とも だち</rt>
</ruby>に<ruby>
<rb>対</rb>
<rt>たい</rt>
</ruby>して、<ruby>
<rb>私</rb>
<rt>わたし</rt>
</ruby>には<ruby>
<rb>慰</rb>
<rt>なぐさ</rt>
</ruby>めの<ruby>
<rb>言葉</rb>
<rt>こと ば</rt>
</ruby>をかける<ruby>
<rb>以上</rb>
<rt>い じょう</rt>
</ruby>のことは<ruby>
<rb>何</rb>
<rt>なに</rt>
</ruby>もしてあげられない。</span>／<span class="translation">I can do nothing more than give words of comfort to my depressed friend.</span></div>
<div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby>
<rb>新</rb>
<rt>あたら</rt>
</ruby>しく<ruby>
<rb>入</rb>
<rt>はい</rt>
</ruby>ったアルバイトの<ruby>
<rb>学生</rb>
<rt>がく せい</rt>
</ruby>は、<ruby>
<rb>命令</rb>
<rt>めい れい</rt>
</ruby>された<ruby>
<rb>以上</rb>
<rt>い じょう</rt>
</ruby>のことをやろうとしないのでほとんど<ruby>
<rb>役</rb>
<rt>やく</rt>
</ruby>に<ruby>
<rb>立</rb>
<rt>た</rt>
</ruby>たない。</span>／<span class="translation">The new part-time worker, who is a student, doesn’t make any effort to do more than what he’s
        ordered to, so he’s hardly any use at all.</span></div>
<div class="explanation">In these cases, いじょう expresses something which has a higher degree than the thing or action
        indicated by a noun or a verb. (1)-(3) are cases in which something exceeds the upper limit, while (4)-(6) are
        cases in which the something is the upper limit and is not exceeded. </div>
<h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x4558"><span class="number">b. </span>...いじょうに</h3>
<h4 class="info">［N／V　 いじょうに］</h4>
<div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>あの<ruby>
<rb>人</rb>
<rt>ひと</rt>
</ruby>は<ruby>
<rb>噂</rb>
<rt>うわさ</rt>
</ruby><ruby>
<rb>以上</rb>
<rt>い じょう</rt>
</ruby>におっちょこちょいだ。</span>／<span class="translation">That person is even more scatterbrained than I’d heard.</span></div>
<div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby>
<rb>試験</rb>
<rt>し けん</rt>
</ruby>の<ruby>
<rb>点</rb>
<rt>てん</rt>
</ruby>は<ruby>
<rb>想像</rb>
<rt>そう ぞう</rt>
</ruby><ruby>
<rb>以上</rb>
<rt>い じょう</rt>
</ruby>に<ruby>
<rb>悪</rb>
<rt>わる</rt>
</ruby>かった。</span>／<span class="translation">The exam score was worse than I expected.</span></div>
<div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby>
<rb>彼女</rb>
<rt>かの じょ</rt>
</ruby>はタイの<ruby>
<rb>人</rb>
<rt>ひと</rt>
</ruby>なのに、<ruby>
<rb>日本人</rb>
<rt>に ほん じん</rt>
</ruby><ruby>
<rb>以上</rb>
<rt>い じょう</rt>
</ruby>に<ruby>
<rb>日本</rb>
<rt>に ほん</rt>
</ruby>の<ruby>
<rb>歴史</rb>
<rt>れき し</rt>
</ruby>について<ruby>
<rb>詳</rb>
<rt>くわ</rt>
</ruby>しい。</span>／<span class="translation">Although she is a Thai, she has more knowledge of Japanese history than Japanese people do.</span></div>
<div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>そのレストランはみんなが<ruby>
<rb>言</rb>
<rt>い</rt>
</ruby>う<ruby>
<rb>以上</rb>
<rt>い じょう</rt>
</ruby>にサービスも<ruby>
<rb>味</rb>
<rt>あじ</rt>
</ruby>も<ruby>
<rb>申</rb>
<rt>もう</rt>
</ruby>し<ruby>
<rb>分</rb>
<rt>ぶん</rt>
</ruby>なかった。</span>／<span class="translation">The restaurant had service and food that was even better than what everyone had said.</span></div>
<div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby>
<rb>彼</rb>
<rt>かれ</rt>
</ruby>は<ruby>
<rb>思</rb>
<rt>おも</rt>
</ruby>っていた<ruby>
<rb>以上</rb>
<rt>い じょう</rt>
</ruby>に<ruby>
<rb>神経</rb>
<rt>しん けい</rt>
</ruby>が<ruby>
<rb>細</rb>
<rt>こま</rt>
</ruby>やかでよく<ruby>
<rb>気</rb>
<rt>き</rt>
</ruby>の<ruby>
<rb>付</rb>
<rt>つ</rt>
</ruby>く<ruby>
<rb>人</rb>
<rt>ひと</rt>
</ruby>だった。</span>／<span class="translation">He was more sensitive and considerate than I had thought.</span></div>
<div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span>ほかの<ruby>
<rb>人</rb>
<rt>ひと</rt>
</ruby>が<ruby>
<rb>練習</rb>
<rt>れん しゅう</rt>
</ruby>する<ruby>
<rb>以上</rb>
<rt>い じょう</rt>
</ruby>にやっているつもりなのに、<ruby>
<rb>全然</rb>
<rt>ぜん ぜん</rt>
</ruby>ピアノが<ruby>
<rb>上達</rb>
<rt>じょう たつ</rt>
</ruby>しないのはどういうわけだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">I feel that I practice more than anyone else, so I can’t figure out why my piano playing
        hasn’t improved at all.</span></div>
<div class="explanation">When いじょうに is attached to a noun or verb, it means “more than…” or “…is also quite a high
        degree, but this is even higher.”</div>
<h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x4609"><span class="number">3. </span>これ／それ／あれ　いじょう</h2>
<h3 class="subsubtitle" id="idsubsubtitlex1x4612"><span class="number">a. </span>これいじょう+<ruby>
<rb>修</rb>
<rt>しゅう</rt>
</ruby><ruby>
<rb>飾</rb>
<rt>しょく</rt>
</ruby><ruby>
<rb>句</rb>
<rt>く</rt>
</ruby>+Nは...ない</h3>
<div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>これ<ruby>
<rb>以上</rb>
<rt>い じょう</rt>
</ruby>わかりやすいテキストは、<ruby>
<rb>今</rb>
<rt>いま</rt>
</ruby>のところない。</span>／<span class="translation">Right now there’s no other textbook that is easier to understand.</span></div>
<div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>あれ<ruby>
<rb>以上</rb>
<rt>い じょう</rt>
</ruby>くだらない<ruby>
<rb>映画</rb>
<rt>えい が</rt>
</ruby>もめったにない。</span>／<span class="translation">You’ll have to go a long way to see a sillier movie than that!</span></div>
<div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>あの<ruby>
<rb>人</rb>
<rt>ひと</rt>
</ruby><ruby>
<rb>以上</rb>
<rt>い じょう</rt>
</ruby>に<ruby>
<rb>賢</rb>
<rt>かしこ</rt>
</ruby>い<ruby>
<rb>人</rb>
<rt>ひと</rt>
</ruby>は<ruby>
<rb>日本中</rb>
<rt>に ほん じゅう</rt>
</ruby><ruby>
<rb>探</rb>
<rt>さが</rt>
</ruby>してもいないだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">Even if you search high and low in Japan, there is probably no one smarter than that person.
    </span></div>
<div class="explanation">In these cases, いじょう mainly follows これ, それ, or あれ, and it means that the thing referred to
        is of the highest (a very high) degree. It is the same as 一番...だ.</div>
<h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x4643"><span class="number">b. </span>これいじょう...ば</h3>
<div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>これ<ruby>
<rb>以上</rb>
<rt>い じょう</rt>
</ruby><ruby>
<rb>水</rb>
<rt>みず</rt>
</ruby>かさが<ruby>
<rb>増</rb>
<rt>ま</rt>
</ruby>すと<ruby>
<rb>大</rb>
<rt>たい</rt>
</ruby><ruby>
<rb>変</rb>
<rt>へん</rt>
</ruby>なことになる。</span>／<span class="translation">There will be trouble if the river rises higher than this. </span></div>
<div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>これ<ruby>
<rb>以上</rb>
<rt>い じょう</rt>
</ruby><ruby>
<rb>雨</rb>
<rt>あめ</rt>
</ruby>が<ruby>
<rb>降</rb>
<rt>ふ</rt>
</ruby>らなければ、<ruby>
<rb>畑</rb>
<rt>はたけ</rt>
</ruby>の<ruby>
<rb>作物</rb>
<rt>さく もつ</rt>
</ruby>は<ruby>
<rb>全滅</rb>
<rt>ぜん めつ</rt>
</ruby>するだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">If we have no more rain from now on, the harvest will be a total loss.</span></div>
<div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>それ<ruby>
<rb>以上</rb>
<rt>い じょう</rt>
</ruby><ruby>
<rb>努力</rb>
<rt>ど りょく</rt>
</ruby>してもおそらく<ruby>
<rb>何</rb>
<rt>なん</rt>
</ruby>の<ruby>
<rb>成果</rb>
<rt>せい か</rt>
</ruby>もあがらないと<ruby>
<rb>思</rb>
<rt>おも</rt>
</ruby>うよ。</span>／<span class="translation">Even if you work harder, I don’t think there will be any better results.</span></div>
<div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>あんな<ruby>
<rb>忙</rb>
<rt>いそが</rt>
</ruby>しい<ruby>
<rb>生活</rb>
<rt>せい かつ</rt>
</ruby>をこれ<ruby>
<rb>以上</rb>
<rt>い じょう</rt>
</ruby><ruby>
<rb>続</rb>
<rt>つづ</rt>
</ruby>けたら、きっと<ruby>
<rb>彼</rb>
<rt>かれ</rt>
</ruby>は<ruby>
<rb>体</rb>
<rt>からだ</rt>
</ruby>をこわしてしまうだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">He’ll surely damage his health if he continues leading such a busy life. </span></div>
<div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby>
<rb>明日</rb>
<rt>あ す</rt>
</ruby>の<ruby>
<rb>講演</rb>
<rt>こう えん</rt>
</ruby>が<ruby>
<rb>今日</rb>
<rt>きょう</rt>
</ruby>の<ruby>
<rb>以上</rb>
<rt>い じょう</rt>
</ruby>につまらないのなら、<ruby>
<rb>行</rb>
<rt>い</rt>
</ruby>くだけ<ruby>
<rb>時間</rb>
<rt>じ かん</rt>
</ruby>の<ruby>
<rb>無駄</rb>
<rt>む だ</rt>
</ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">It will be a waste of time to go if tomorrow’s lecture is more boring than today’s. </span></div>
<div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby>
<rb>今以上</rb>
<rt>いま い じょう</rt>
</ruby>にいろいろ<ruby>
<rb>工夫</rb>
<rt>く ふう</rt>
</ruby>して<ruby>
<rb>料理</rb>
<rt>りょう り</rt>
</ruby>を<ruby>
<rb>作</rb>
<rt>つく</rt>
</ruby>っても、<ruby>
<rb>誰</rb>
<rt>だれ</rt>
</ruby>もほめてくれなければつまらない。</span>／<span class="translation">Even if you come up with lots of new kinds of cooking, it’s no fun if no one praises you
        for it.</span></div>
<div class="explanation">In addition to これいじょう, それいじょう and あれいじょう are also used, and と, たら, なら, and ても may be used
        in place of ば. These mean “if or even if a certain state has a higher degree than it has now.” They often
        include the meaning “even though there’s quite a high degree already.”</div>
<h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x4692"><span class="number">c. </span>これいじょうV-て</h3>
<div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>それ<ruby>
<rb>以上</rb>
<rt>い じょう</rt>
</ruby><ruby>
<rb>頑張</rb>
<rt>がん ば</rt>
</ruby>ってどうなると<ruby>
<rb>言</rb>
<rt>い</rt>
</ruby>うのだ。</span>／<span class="translation">What will become of you if you work harder than now?</span></div>
<div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby>
<rb>彼女</rb>
<rt>かの じょ</rt>
</ruby>、あんなに<ruby>
<rb>細</rb>
<rt>ほそ</rt>
</ruby>いのに、あれ<ruby>
<rb>以上</rb>
<rt>い じょう</rt>
</ruby>ダイエットしてどうするんだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">What does she mean by going on a stricter diet, as thin as she is already?</span></div>
<div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>あなた、これ<ruby>
<rb>以上</rb>
<rt>い じょう</rt>
</ruby>お<ruby>
<rb>金</rb>
<rt>かね</rt>
</ruby>をためて、いったい<ruby>
<rb>何</rb>
<rt>なに</rt>
</ruby>に<ruby>
<rb>使</rb>
<rt>つか</rt>
</ruby>おうって<ruby>
<rb>言</rb>
<rt>い</rt>
</ruby>うのよ。</span>／<span class="translation">Tell me, if you save even more money, what are you going to use it for?</span></div>
<div class="explanation">いじょうmainly joins to これ, それ, or あれ and means “to do more than the current state.” When it is
        followed by どうなるのか, どうするのか, 何をするのか, or 何になるのか, it often expresses “it’s useless to do ..., doing... won’t help.”
    </div>
<h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x4723"><span class="number">d. </span>これいじょう...は+<ruby>
<rb>否</rb>
<rt>ひ</rt>
</ruby><ruby>
<rb>定</rb>
<rt>てい</rt>
</ruby><ruby>
<rb>的</rb>
<rt>てき</rt>
</ruby><ruby>
<rb>表</rb>
<rt>ひょう</rt>
</ruby><ruby>
<rb>現</rb>
<rt>げん</rt>
</ruby></h3>
<div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>お<ruby>
<rb>互</rb>
<rt>たが</rt>
</ruby>いこれ<ruby>
<rb>以上</rb>
<rt>い じょう</rt>
</ruby><ruby>
<rb>争</rb>
<rt>あらそ</rt>
</ruby>うのはやめましょうよ。</span>／<span class="translation">Let’s stop this fight here.</span></div>
<div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>もうこれ<ruby>
<rb>以上</rb>
<rt>い じょう</rt>
</ruby><ruby>
<rb>今</rb>
<rt>いま</rt>
</ruby>のような<ruby>
<rb>忙</rb>
<rt>いそが</rt>
</ruby>しい<ruby>
<rb>生活</rb>
<rt>せい かつ</rt>
</ruby>には<ruby>
<rb>耐</rb>
<rt>た</rt>
</ruby>えられない。</span>／<span class="translation">I can’t take it if my life gets any busier than it is now.</span></div>
<div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>さすが<ruby>
<rb>田中</rb>
<rt>た なか</rt>
</ruby>さんだ。ほかの<ruby>
<rb>人</rb>
<rt>ひと</rt>
</ruby>にはあれ<ruby>
<rb>以上</rb>
<rt>い じょう</rt>
</ruby>の<ruby>
<rb>発明</rb>
<rt>はつ めい</rt>
</ruby>はちょっとできないだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">That’s exactly what I’d expect from Tanaka-san. It would have been impossible for other
        people to invent something better than that. </span></div>
<div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby>
<rb>雪</rb>
<rt>ゆき</rt>
</ruby>もひどくなってきたし、もうこれ<ruby>
<rb>以上</rb>
<rt>い じょう</rt>
</ruby><ruby>
<rb>先</rb>
<rt>さき</rt>
</ruby>へ<ruby>
<rb>進</rb>
<rt>すす</rt>
</ruby>むのは<ruby>
<rb>危険</rb>
<rt>き けん</rt>
</ruby>だ。ここであきらめて<ruby>
<rb>下山</rb>
<rt>げ ざん</rt>
</ruby>しよう。</span>／<span class="translation">The snow has gotten even worse, and it’s dangerous to keep on going further. Let’s give up and head
        back down.</span></div>
<div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><span class="number">A:</span>もっと<ruby>
<rb>安</rb>
<rt>やす</rt>
</ruby>くなりませんか。</span>／<span class="translation">Can’t you make it any cheaper?</span></div>
<div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>もうこれ<ruby>
<rb>以上</rb>
<rt>い じょう</rt>
</ruby>は<ruby>
<rb>勘弁</rb>
<rt>かん べん</rt>
</ruby>してくださいよ。これでももうほとんどうちの<ruby>
<rb>方</rb>
<rt>ほう</rt>
</ruby>はもうけがないくらいなんですから。</span>／<span class="translation"> Please don’t push me any more. We are hardly making any profit as it is already.</span></div>
<div class="explanation">Whenいじょう is joined toこれ, それ, or あれ and is followed by a negative expression like できない, 難しい,
        耐えられない, or やめよう, it means that the present state is the highest degree possible and cannot be exceeded.</div>
<h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x4778"><span class="number">4. </span>Vいじょう（は）</h2>
<div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby>
<rb>絶対</rb>
<rt>ぜっ たい</rt>
</ruby>にできると<ruby>
<rb>言</rb>
<rt>い</rt>
</ruby>ってしまった<ruby>
<rb>以上</rb>
<rt>い じょう</rt>
</ruby>、どんな<ruby>
<rb>失敗</rb>
<rt>しっ ぱい</rt>
</ruby>も<ruby>
<rb>許</rb>
<rt>ゆる</rt>
</ruby>されない。</span>／<span class="translation">Having stated that it can definitely be done, no one will allow any failure.</span></div>
<div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby>
<rb>全員</rb>
<rt>ぜん いん</rt>
</ruby><ruby>
<rb>一致</rb>
<rt>いっ ち</rt>
</ruby>で<ruby>
<rb>選</rb>
<rt>えら</rt>
</ruby>ばれてクラブの<ruby>
<rb>部長</rb>
<rt>ぶ ちょう</rt>
</ruby>になる<ruby>
<rb>以上</rb>
<rt>い じょう</rt>
</ruby>、みんなの<ruby>
<rb>信頼</rb>
<rt>しん らい</rt>
</ruby>を<ruby>
<rb>裏切</rb>
<rt>うら ぎ</rt>
</ruby>るようなことだけはしたくない。</span>／<span class="translation">Now that I have been unanimously elected to be the head of the club, I don’t want to do
        anything to betray everyone’s confidence.</span></div>
<div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby>
<rb>大学</rb>
<rt>だい がく</rt>
</ruby>をやめる<ruby>
<rb>以上</rb>
<rt>い じょう</rt>
</ruby>、<ruby>
<rb>学歴</rb>
<rt>がく れき</rt>
</ruby>に<ruby>
<rb>頼</rb>
<rt>たよ</rt>
</ruby>らないで<ruby>
<rb>生</rb>
<rt>い</rt>
</ruby>きていける<ruby>
<rb>力</rb>
<rt>ちから</rt>
</ruby>を<ruby>
<rb>自分</rb>
<rt>じ ぶん</rt>
</ruby>で<ruby>
<rb>身</rb>
<rt>み</rt>
</ruby>につけなければならない。</span>／<span class="translation">Now that I am dropping out of university, I have to acquire the ability to get by on my own
        without relying on my academic record.</span></div>
<div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>こういうことになってしまった<ruby>
<rb>以上</rb>
<rt>い じょう</rt>
</ruby>、<ruby>
<rb>私</rb>
<rt>わたし</rt>
</ruby>が<ruby>
<rb>責任</rb>
<rt>せき にん</rt>
</ruby>を<ruby>
<rb>取</rb>
<rt>と</rt>
</ruby>って<ruby>
<rb>辞</rb>
<rt>や</rt>
</ruby>めるしか<ruby>
<rb>解決策</rb>
<rt>かい けつ さく</rt>
</ruby>はないだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">Now that this kind of thing has happened, there is no other solution but for me to take
        responsibility and quit my job. </span></div>
<div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby>
<rb>私</rb>
<rt>わたし</rt>
</ruby>に<ruby>
<rb>通訳</rb>
<rt>つう やく</rt>
</ruby>がちゃんとつとまるかどうかわかりませんが、お<ruby>
<rb>引</rb>
<rt>ひ</rt>
</ruby>き<ruby>
<rb>受</rb>
<rt>う</rt>
</ruby>けした<ruby>
<rb>以上</rb>
<rt>い じょう</rt>
</ruby>は<ruby>
<rb>精一杯</rb>
<rt>せい いっ ぱい</rt>
</ruby>の<ruby>
<rb>努力</rb>
<rt>ど りょく</rt>
</ruby>はするつもりです。</span>／<span class="translation">I am not sure if I can do well as an interpreter, but I’ll do my best since I accepted the job.
    </span></div>
<div class="explanation">With verbs that indicate an action involving responsibility or resolve, いじょう expresses
        “given the circumstances that I have done/will do such-and-such.” In the latter half of the sentence, the
        speaker indicates <span class="noSeparate">his/her</span> determination and intention to take responsibility by
        using expressions of resolution, warning, obligation, and so on.</div>
<h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x4821"><span class="number">5. </span>いじょう</h2>
<h3 class="subsubtitle" id="idsubsubtitlex1x4824"><span class="number">a. </span>いじょう（の）　+<ruby>
<rb>数</rb>
<rt>すう</rt>
</ruby><ruby>
<rb>量</rb>
<rt>りょう</rt>
</ruby><ruby>
<rb>詞</rb>
<rt>し</rt>
</ruby>／N</h3>
<div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby>
<rb>田中</rb>
<rt>た なか</rt>
</ruby>、<ruby>
<rb>木村</rb>
<rt>き むら</rt>
</ruby>、<ruby>
<rb>山本</rb>
<rt>やま もと</rt>
</ruby>、<ruby>
<rb>吉田</rb>
<rt>よし だ</rt>
</ruby>、<ruby>
<rb>以上</rb>
<rt>い じょう</rt>
</ruby>の4<ruby>
<rb>人</rb>
<rt>にん</rt>
</ruby>はあとで<ruby>
<rb>私</rb>
<rt>わたし</rt>
</ruby>のところに<ruby>
<rb>来</rb>
<rt>き</rt>
</ruby>なさい。</span>／<span class="translation">The following four persons are to come and see me later: Tanaka, Kimura, Yamamoto, and Yoshida.
    </span></div>
<div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby>
<rb>東京</rb>
<rt>とう きょう</rt>
</ruby>、<ruby>
<rb>大阪</rb>
<rt>おお さか</rt>
</ruby>、<ruby>
<rb>京都</rb>
<rt>きょう と</rt>
</ruby>、<ruby>
<rb>神戸</rb>
<rt>こう べ</rt>
</ruby>、<ruby>
<rb>福岡</rb>
<rt>ふく おか</rt>
</ruby>、<ruby>
<rb>札幌</rb>
<rt>さっ ぽろ</rt>
</ruby>、<ruby>
<rb>以上</rb>
<rt>い じょう</rt>
</ruby>6つの<ruby>
<rb>都市</rb>
<rt>と し</rt>
</ruby>が<ruby>
<rb>今回</rb>
<rt>こん かい</rt>
</ruby>の<ruby>
<rb>調査</rb>
<rt>ちょう さ</rt>
</ruby><ruby>
<rb>対象</rb>
<rt>たい しょう</rt>
</ruby>となります。</span>／<span class="translation">Tokyo, Osaka, Kyoto, Kobe, Fukuoka, and Sapporo—these six cities are the survey targets this time.
    </span></div>
<div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby>
<rb>自分</rb>
<rt>じ ぶん</rt>
</ruby>の<ruby>
<rb>長所</rb>
<rt>ちょう しょ</rt>
</ruby>、<ruby>
<rb>短所</rb>
<rt>たん しょ</rt>
</ruby>、<ruby>
<rb>自慢</rb>
<rt>じ まん</rt>
</ruby>できること、<ruby>
<rb>今</rb>
<rt>いま</rt>
</ruby><ruby>
<rb>一番</rb>
<rt>いち ばん</rt>
</ruby><ruby>
<rb>関心</rb>
<rt>かん しん</rt>
</ruby>のあること、<ruby>
<rb>将来</rb>
<rt>しょう らい</rt>
</ruby>の<ruby>
<rb>夢</rb>
<rt>ゆめ</rt>
</ruby>、<ruby>
<rb>以上</rb>
<rt>い じょう</rt>
</ruby>5<ruby>
<rb>点</rb>
<rt>てん</rt>
</ruby>をはっきりさせて<ruby>
<rb>自己</rb>
<rt>じこ</rt>
</ruby><ruby>
<rb>紹介文</rb>
<rt>しょう かい ぶん</rt>
</ruby>を<ruby>
<rb>書</rb>
<rt>か</rt>
</ruby>いてください。</span>／<span class="translation">Please write your self-introduction and include these five points: your strengths, your
        weaknesses, something you take pride in, the thing that most interests you now, and your future dreams.</span></div>
<div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby>
<rb>植物</rb>
<rt>しょく ぶつ</rt>
</ruby>をむやみに<ruby>
<rb>採</rb>
<rt>と</rt>
</ruby>らないこと、<ruby>
<rb>火</rb>
<rt>ひ</rt>
</ruby>の<ruby>
<rb>後始末</rb>
<rt>あと し まつ</rt>
</ruby>に<ruby>
<rb>気</rb>
<rt>き</rt>
</ruby>を<ruby>
<rb>付</rb>
<rt>つ</rt>
</ruby>けること、トイレはきれいに<ruby>
<rb>使</rb>
<rt>つか</rt>
</ruby>うこと、<ruby>
<rb>以上</rb>
<rt>い じょう</rt>
</ruby>のことを<ruby>
<rb>必</rb>
<rt>かなら</rt>
</ruby>ず<ruby>
<rb>守</rb>
<rt>まも</rt>
</ruby>ってキャンプしてください。</span>／<span class="translation">Please follow the rules for camping, which are not to pull up plants recklessly, to make
        sure all fires are carefully put out, and to keep the bathrooms clean when using them.</span></div>
<div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby>
<rb>発音</rb>
<rt>はつ おん</rt>
</ruby>はきれいか、<ruby>
<rb>言語</rb>
<rt>げん ご</rt>
</ruby><ruby>
<rb>表現</rb>
<rt>ひょう げん</rt>
</ruby>は<ruby>
<rb>適切</rb>
<rt>てき せつ</rt>
</ruby>か、<ruby>
<rb>内容</rb>
<rt>ない よう</rt>
</ruby>は<ruby>
<rb>興味</rb>
<rt>きょう み</rt>
</ruby>を<ruby>
<rb>感</rb>
<rt>かん</rt>
</ruby>じさせるか、<ruby>
<rb>訴</rb>
<rt>うった</rt>
</ruby>えたいことははっきり<ruby>
<rb>伝</rb>
<rt>つた</rt>
</ruby>わってくるか、<ruby>
<rb>以上</rb>
<rt>い じょう</rt>
</ruby>のような<ruby>
<rb>点</rb>
<rt>てん</rt>
</ruby>がスピーチの<ruby>
<rb>審査</rb>
<rt>しん さ</rt>
</ruby>の<ruby>
<rb>時</rb>
<rt>とき</rt>
</ruby>におもにポイントとなる。</span>／<span class="translation">Clear pronunciation, proper verbal expression, interesting content, and clear
        presentation—these are what generally count for the most points when judging a speech.</span></div>
<div class="explanation">In these cases, いじょう is used when a series of items is listed and then summarized. </div>
<h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x4867"><span class="number">b. </span>いじょう</h3>
<div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby>
<rb>作業</rb>
<rt>さ ぎょう</rt>
</ruby>が<ruby>
<rb>終</rb>
<rt>お</rt>
</ruby>わり<ruby>
<rb>次第</rb>
<rt>し だい</rt>
</ruby>、<ruby>
<rb>必</rb>
<rt>かなら</rt>
</ruby>ず<ruby>
<rb>報告</rb>
<rt>ほう こく</rt>
</ruby>に<ruby>
<rb>来</rb>
<rt>く</rt>
</ruby>ること。<ruby>
<rb>以上</rb>
<rt>い じょう</rt>
</ruby>。</span>／<span class="translation">Be sure to report to me as soon as you finish the work. That’s all.</span></div>
<div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby>
<rb>次</rb>
<rt>つぎ</rt>
</ruby>の<ruby>
<rb>品物</rb>
<rt>しな もの</rt>
</ruby>を<ruby>
<rb>記念品</rb>
<rt>き ねん ひん</rt>
</ruby>として<ruby>
<rb>贈呈</rb>
<rt>ぞう てい</rt>
</ruby>します。<ruby>
<rb>置</rb>
<rt>お</rt>
</ruby>き<ruby>
<rb>時計</rb>
<rt>ど けい</rt>
</ruby><ruby>
<rb>一</rb>
<rt>ひと</rt>
</ruby>つ、<ruby>
<rb>木製</rb>
<rt>もくせい</rt>
</ruby><ruby>
<rb>本棚</rb>
<rt>ほん だな</rt>
</ruby><ruby>
<rb>二</rb>
<rt>ふた</rt>
</ruby>つ、<ruby>
<rb>百科</rb>
<rt>ひゃっ か</rt>
</ruby><ruby>
<rb>事典</rb>
<rt>じ てん</rt>
</ruby><ruby>
<rb>全</rb>
<rt>ぜん</rt>
</ruby> 20 <ruby>
<rb>巻</rb>
<rt>かん</rt>
</ruby><ruby>
<rb>一式</rb>
<rt>いっしき</rt>
</ruby>。<ruby>
<rb>以上</rb>
<rt>い じょう</rt>
</ruby>です。</span>／<span class="translation">I will donate the following articles as memorabilia: one table clock, two wooden bookshelves, and a
        20-volume set of encyclopedias. That’s all.</span></div>
<div class="explanation">Means “that’s all I have to say” or “the end.” Often used for written documents such as
        official forms or lists. </div>
</body>
</html>