<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>おいそれと（は）...ない</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0089.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【お...ねがう】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0091.xhtml">【おいて】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x7973">【おいそれと（は）...ない】</h1><h4 class="info">［おいそれと（は）V-れない］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>産</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>んだばかりの<ruby><rb>母</rb><rt>はは</rt></ruby>ネコにはおいそれとは<ruby><rb>近</rb><rt>ちか</rt></ruby>づけない。</span>／<span class="translation">We can’t easily get close to a mother cat that has just had kittens.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>君</rb><rt>きみ</rt></ruby>ならできるとおだてられても、あんな<ruby><rb>大役</rb><rt>たい やく</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>責任</rb><rt>せき にん</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>重</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>いし、おいそれとは<ruby><rb>引</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>受</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>けられない。</span>／<span class="translation">Even though you flatter me that I can do it, I can’t easily undertake such an important task with so much responsibility.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>当時</rb><rt>とう じ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>大変</rb><rt>たい へん</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>不景気</rb><rt>ふ けい き</rt></ruby>で、<ruby><rb>大学</rb><rt>だい がく</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>たからといっておいそれと<ruby><rb>就職</rb><rt>しゅう しょく</rt></ruby>できるような<ruby><rb>時代</rb><rt>じ だい</rt></ruby>ではなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">Those were really hard times, so even if someone had graduated from a university, it was not easy to get a job.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>お<ruby><rb>礼</rb><rt>れい</rt></ruby>にと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ってお<ruby><rb>金</rb><rt>かね</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>差</rb><rt>さ</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>だ</rt></ruby>されたが、<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なに</rt></ruby>か<ruby><rb>下心</rb><rt>した ごころ</rt></ruby>がありそうなので、おいそれと<ruby><rb>受</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>け<ruby><rb>取</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>るわけにはいかなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">They offered me money to show their gratitude, but I couldn’t easily accept it, because they seemed to have some kind of ulterior motive.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means that, for some reason, an action can’t be easily done. Used with sentence-final expressions such as the negative form of the potential V-れる and indicates that the action expressed by a verb is impossible. Sometimes おいそれと...する modifies nouns, such as 時代 in (3). In that case, too, the noun is followed by a negative expression. V-るわけにはいかない, as in (4), expresses impossibility.</div></body></html>