<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ではなかろうか</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0487.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ではなかったか】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0489.xhtml">【ではなくて】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x44335">【ではなかろうか】</h1><h4 class="info">［N／Na　（なの）ではなかろうか］</h4><h4 class="info">［A／V　のではなかろうか］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>成績</rb><rt>せい せき</rt></ruby>では、この<ruby><rb>大学</rb><rt>だい がく</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>無理</rb><rt>む り</rt></ruby>ではなかろうか。</span>／<span class="translation">With his grades, getting into this university is hardly possible, is it?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>低温</rb><rt>ていおん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>続</rb><rt>つづ</rt></ruby>きで、<ruby><rb>今年</rb><rt>ことし</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>桜</rb><rt>さくら</rt></ruby>はちょっと<ruby><rb>遅</rb><rt>おそ</rt></ruby>いのではなかろうか。</span>／<span class="translation">This year’s cherry blossoms are likely to be a little late, what with the continuing cool temperatures.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>不況</rb><rt>ふ きょう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>長引</rb><rt>なが び</rt></ruby>くのではなかろうか。</span>／<span class="translation">Isn’t it likely that this business slump will continue to drag on?</span></div><div class="explanation">A somewhat old-fashioned way of saying ではないだろうか. Used in persuasive/argumentative writing. Essentially synonymous with ではあるまいか.</div><h4 class="reference">→<a href="part0478.xhtml#idtitlex1x43162">【ではあるまいか】</a></h4></body></html>