<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>あるいは</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0023.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【あらためる】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0025.xhtml">【あるまじき...だ】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x1716">【あるいは】</h1><div class="explanation">Typical of written language. Also used in formal spoken language. </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x1728"><span class="number">1. </span>あるいは</h2><h3 class="subsubtitle" id="idsubsubtitlex1x1731"><span class="number">a. </span>N（か）あるいはN</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>黒</rb><rt>くろ</rt></ruby>あるいは<ruby><rb>青</rb><rt>あお</rt></ruby>のペンで<ruby><rb>記入</rb><rt>き にゅう</rt></ruby>してください。</span>／<span class="translation">Please fill it in using a black or blue pen.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>欠席</rb><rt>けっ せき</rt></ruby>する<ruby><rb>場合</rb><rt>ば あい</rt></ruby>には、<ruby><rb>口頭</rb><rt>こう とう</rt></ruby>かあるいは<ruby><rb>書面</rb><rt>しょ めん</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>届</rb><rt>とど</rt></ruby>け<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>ること。</span>／<span class="translation">If you are going to be absent, oral or written notification is required.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>このクラブの<ruby><rb>施設</rb><rt>し せつ</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>会員</rb><rt>かい いん</rt></ruby>あるいはその<ruby><rb>家族</rb><rt>か ぞく</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>限</rb><rt>かぎ</rt></ruby>り、<ruby><rb>使用</rb><rt>し よう</rt></ruby>することができます。</span>／<span class="translation">Only members and/or their families can use the facilities of this club. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>応募</rb><rt>おう ぼ</rt></ruby>は、25 <ruby><rb>歳以上</rb><rt>さい い じょう</rt></ruby>、あるいは 20 <ruby><rb>歳以上</rb><rt>さい い じょう</rt></ruby>で、<ruby><rb>職業</rb><rt>しょく ぎょう</rt></ruby>をお<ruby><rb>持</rb><rt>も</rt></ruby>ちの<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>かた</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>限</rb><rt>かぎ</rt></ruby>ります。</span>／<span class="translation">Applications are limited to those over 25 years of age or those in full-time employment aged 20 or more.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>被害者</rb><rt>ひ がい しゃ</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>包丁</rb><rt>ほう ちょう</rt></ruby>あるいは<ruby><rb>登山</rb><rt>と ざん</rt></ruby>ナイフのようなもので<ruby><rb>殺害</rb><rt>さつ がい</rt></ruby>されたらしい。</span>／<span class="translation">I heard that the victim was killed with something like a kitchen cleaver or a mountaineering knife. </span></div><div class="explanation">Indicates “either X or Y.” It is often used when giving instructions to indicate “you can choose either X or Y, but choose only one of these,” as in (1) and (2). It is also used for indicating a condition that implies “it’s all right if it conforms to either X or Y,” as in (3) and (4). In the case of (4), suitable answers include X, Y, or both. As shown in (5), it is often used when “there are two possibilities (X or Y), so I don’t know which one to choose.” </div><div class="explanation">XかY, XまたはY, XもしくはY are similar expressions. In everyday spoken language,  XかY is often used.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x1784"><span class="number">b. </span>...か、あるいは</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>申</rb><rt>もう</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>込</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>み<ruby><rb>書類</rb><rt>しょ るい</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>郵送</rb><rt>ゆう そう</rt></ruby>するかあるいは<ruby><rb>事務所</rb><rt>じ む しょ</rt></ruby>まで<ruby><rb>持参</rb><rt>じ さん</rt></ruby>してください。</span>／<span class="translation">Please bring or send your application form to our office.  </span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>福岡</rb><rt>ふく おか</rt></ruby>へは、どうやって<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ったらいいですかね。</span>／<span class="translation">How do I get to Fukuoka?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>そうですね。<ruby><rb>新幹線</rb><rt>しん かん せん</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>くか、あるいは<ruby><rb>飛行機</rb><rt>ひ こう き</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>くか、でしょうね。</span>／<span class="translation">Well, either by <i>s</i><i>hinkansen</i><i> </i>(bullet train), or by air.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>社会人</rb><rt>しゃ かい じん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>大学院</rb><rt>だい がく いん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>入学</rb><rt>にゅう がく</rt></ruby>するためには、<ruby><rb>定職</rb><rt>てい しょく</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>就</rb><rt>つ</rt></ruby>いているか、あるいは 25 <ruby><rb>歳以上</rb><rt>さい い じょう</rt></ruby>であることが<ruby><rb>条件</rb><rt>じょう けん</rt></ruby>である。</span>／<span class="translation">In order to enter graduate school for working adults, one must have regular employment or be over 25 years old. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>就職</rb><rt>しゅう しょく</rt></ruby>しようか、あるいは<ruby><rb>進学</rb><rt>しん がく</rt></ruby>しようかと<ruby><rb>迷</rb><rt>まよ</rt></ruby>っている。</span>／<span class="translation">I am thinking about whether to find a job or continue on in school.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>被害者</rb><rt>ひ がい しゃ</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>犯人</rb><rt>はん にん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>らない<ruby><rb>男</rb><rt>おとこ</rt></ruby>だと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>っています。</span>／<span class="translation">The victim says the culprit was unknown to him.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span><ruby><rb>本当</rb><rt>ほん  とう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>らないか、あるいは<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>らないふりをしているか、どちらかだな。</span>／<span class="translation">It must be one or the other—either he really doesn’t know who it was, or he’s pretending not to know.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>景気</rb><rt>けい き</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>数年</rb><rt>すう ねん</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>回復</rb><rt>かい ふく</rt></ruby>するのか、あるいは<ruby><rb>何十年</rb><rt>なん じゅう ねん</rt></ruby>もかかるのか、まったく<ruby><rb>予想</rb><rt>よ そう</rt></ruby>できない。</span>／<span class="translation">No one can predict whether business conditions will look up in just a few years, or whether it will take decades. </span></div><div class="explanation">XかあるいはY indicates “either X or Y.” (1) and (2) are examples in which either X or Y is acceptable (but only one is chosen). In (3), it indicates “if it conforms to condition X or Y, either of them can be chosen,” and it is also acceptable if both are true. (4)-(6), indicate “there are two possibilities (X and Y), but I don’t know which one to choose.”</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x1864"><span class="number">2. </span>あるいは...かもしれない</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>このぶんでは、<ruby><rb>明日</rb><rt>あ す</rt></ruby>はあるいは<ruby><rb>雪</rb><rt>ゆき</rt></ruby>かもしれない。</span>／<span class="translation">If the weather stays like this, it might snow tomorrow.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>うことは、あるいは<ruby><rb>本当</rb><rt>ほん  とう</rt></ruby>かもしれない。</span>／<span class="translation">What he is saying might be true.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>これで、<ruby><rb>手術</rb><rt>しゅ じゅつ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>三度目</rb><rt>さん ど め</rt></ruby>だが、<ruby><rb>今回</rb><rt>こん かい</rt></ruby>はあるいはだめかもしれない。</span>／<span class="translation">This is the third time for me to have surgery, but this operation might not succeed. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>もう<ruby><rb>何年</rb><rt>なん ねん</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>国</rb><rt>くに</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>帰</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>っていない。<ruby><rb>両親</rb><rt>りょう しん</rt></ruby>でも<ruby><rb>生</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>きていれば、あるいは<ruby><rb>帰</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>りたいと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>ったかもしれないが、<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>った<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>もほとんどいない<ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>特</rb><rt>とく</rt></ruby>になつかしいとも<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>わない。</span>／<span class="translation">I haven’t gone home for many years. If my parents were alive, I might want to go, but there’s hardly anyone I know these now, so I really don’t miss it so much.</span></div><div class="explanation">In these cases, あるいはis used in the pattern あるいは...かもしれない and expresses the speaker’s supposition that something is possible. ひょっとすると andもしかすると are similar to あるいは...かもしれない.</div><div class="explanation">あるいは can also be used with other suppositional expressions, such as あるいは...のだろう and あるいは...かもしれない.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x1911"><span class="number">3. </span>あるいは...あるいは</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>高校</rb><rt>こう こう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>卒業</rb><rt>そつ ぎょう</rt></ruby>した<ruby><rb>学生</rb><rt>がく せい</rt></ruby>たちは、あるいは<ruby><rb>進学</rb><rt>しん がく</rt></ruby>し、あるいは<ruby><rb>就職</rb><rt>しゅう しょく</rt></ruby>し、それぞれの<ruby><rb>進路</rb><rt>しん ろ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>歩</rb><rt>あゆ</rt></ruby>み<ruby><rb>始</rb><rt>はじ</rt></ruby>める。</span>／<span class="translation">Students who have graduated from high school go off on their own ways, with some continuing on to college and some getting a job.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>美</rb><rt>うつく</rt></ruby>しかった<ruby><rb>街路樹</rb><rt>がい ろ じゅ</rt></ruby>も、あるいは<ruby><rb>横倒</rb><rt>よこ だお</rt></ruby>しになり、あるいは<ruby><rb>途中</rb><rt>と ちゅう</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>二</rb><rt>ふた</rt></ruby>つに<ruby><rb>折</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>れて、<ruby><rb>台風</rb><rt>たい ふう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>威力</rb><rt>い りょく</rt></ruby>のすさまじさを<ruby><rb>物語</rb><rt>もの がた</rt></ruby>っている。</span>／<span class="translation">The beautiful trees lining the street have fallen over or been broken in two, attesting to the tremendous power of the typhoon.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>風</rb><rt>かぜ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>音</rb><rt>おと</rt></ruby>は、あるいは<ruby><rb>泣</rb><rt>な</rt></ruby>くが<ruby><rb>如</rb><rt>ごと</rt></ruby>く、あるいは<ruby><rb>呻</rb><rt>うめ</rt></ruby>くが<ruby><rb>如</rb><rt>ごと</rt></ruby>く、<ruby><rb>高</rb><rt>たか</rt></ruby>く<ruby><rb>低</rb><rt>ひく</rt></ruby>く、<ruby><rb>一晩中</rb><rt>ひと ばん じゅう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>谷間</rb><rt>たに ま</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>響</rb><rt>ひび</rt></ruby>いた。</span>／<span class="translation">The sound of the wind reverberated across the valley all through the night, sounding sometimes like crying and sometimes like groaning, at times high and at times low.</span></div><div class="explanation">This is used to describe multiple situations. </div><div class="explanation">In these cases, あるいはis used in the pattern あるいは...し、あるいは...し, as in (1) and (2), where more than two actions or states are described in parallel and the meaning is something like “someone is..., and someone is....” In (3), it means “sometimes it is..., and sometimes it is....” These are formal expressions used in written language, not in everyday spoken language.</div></body></html>