<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>いわゆる</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0074.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【いわば】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0076.xhtml">【うえ】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x6819">【いわゆる】</h1><h4 class="info">［いわゆるN］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>これがいわゆるエスニック<ruby><rb>料理</rb><rt>りょう り</rt></ruby>というものですか。</span>／<span class="translation">Is this what’s called ethnic cuisine?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>はいわゆる<ruby><rb>普通</rb><rt>ふ つう</rt></ruby>のOLで、<ruby><rb>役職</rb><rt>やく しょく</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>就</rb><rt>つ</rt></ruby>きたいなどとは<ruby><rb>考</rb><rt>かんが</rt></ruby>えたこともなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">She is a so-called “office lady,” an ordinary working woman, and she had never thought that she wanted to be promoted to a managerial position.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>も、いわゆるワールドミュージックのブームに<ruby><rb>乗</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>って、<ruby><rb>世界的</rb><rt>せ かい てき</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>売</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>れるようになった<ruby><rb>歌手</rb><rt>か しゅ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>一人</rb><rt>ひとり</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">He is one of the singers who became popular all over the world by getting on the so-called world music bandwagon.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><span class="number">A:</span>うちの<ruby><rb>大学</rb><rt>だい がく</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>最近</rb><rt>さい きん</rt></ruby>またアメリカの<ruby><rb>大学</rb><rt>だい がく</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>姉妹校</rb><rt>し まい こう</rt></ruby>になったんです。これで8<ruby><rb>校</rb><rt>こう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>目</rb><rt>め</rt></ruby>ですよ。</span>／<span class="translation">Recently, my university became a sister school with another university in America. This is our eighth partner school.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>ああ、いわゆる「<ruby><rb>大学</rb><rt>だい がく</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>国際化</rb><rt>こく さい か</rt></ruby>」というやつですね。そういうのが<ruby><rb>国際化</rb><rt>こく さい か</rt></ruby>だと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>っている<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>が、まだたくさんいるんですねえ。</span>／<span class="translation">Oh, yes, it’s what they call “the internationalization of universities.” There are still lots of people who regard things like that as internationalization. </span></div><div class="explanation">Means “it is generally called....” Used to explain something clearly using everyday words. There are cases, as in (4), in which it conveys that the expression or concept in question is unfavorable to the speaker. </div></body></html>