<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ことだから</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0216.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ことだ】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0218.xhtml">【ことだし】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x17482">【ことだから】</h1><h4 class="info">［Nのことだから］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>のことだからどうせ<ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby>どおりにはこないだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">Given the way he is, he probably won’t come on time anyway. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>あの<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>のことだから、わすれずに<ruby><rb>持</rb><rt>も</rt></ruby>ってきてくれると<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>うけどな。</span>／<span class="translation">I would say that, because he’s got it, he’ll probably remember to bring it. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>慎重</rb><rt>しん ちょう</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>山田</rb><rt>やま だ</rt></ruby>さんのことだから、そのへんのところまでちゃんと<ruby><rb>考</rb><rt>かんが</rt></ruby>えてあるとは<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>うけどね。</span>／<span class="translation">Since Yamada-san is so cautious, I would guess that she already has everything all thought out. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>あの<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>のことだから、この<ruby><rb>計画</rb><rt>けい かく</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>失敗</rb><rt>しっ ぱい</rt></ruby>しても<ruby><rb>自分</rb><rt>じ ぶん</rt></ruby>だけは<ruby><rb>責任</rb><rt>せき にん</rt></ruby>をのがれられるような<ruby><rb>手</rb><rt>て</rt></ruby>はうってあるんだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">You know how he is—I would guess that he’s already taken measures to ensure he can escape having to take any responsibility in case the plan fails. </span></div><div class="explanation">Usually attached to a noun that denotes a person. Used when making some sort of judgment about a person that both the speaker and the listener know very well, based on that person’s character or behavioral patterns. In some cases, the characteristic or special feature  that forms the basis for the judgment about the person in question is specified in the context, such as 慎重な (cautious) in (3).</div></body></html>