<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>となれば</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0609.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【となると】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0611.xhtml">【とにかく】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x57862">【となれば】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x57864"><span class="number">1. </span>...となれば</h2><h4 class="info">［N／Na　（だ）となれば］</h4><h4 class="info">［A／V　となれば］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>外国</rb><rt>がい こく</rt></ruby>へ<ruby><rb>住</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>むとなればやはりその<ruby><rb>国</rb><rt>くに</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>言葉</rb><rt>こと ば</rt></ruby>ぐらいは<ruby><rb>勉強</rb><rt>べん きょう</rt></ruby>しておいたほうがよい。</span>／<span class="translation">If one’s to live overseas, then it follows that it’s a good idea to study the language of that country.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>結婚</rb><rt>けっ こん</rt></ruby>してから<ruby><rb>両親</rb><rt>りょう しん</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>同居</rb><rt>どう きょ</rt></ruby>するとなれば、<ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>家</rb><rt>いえ</rt></ruby>では<ruby><rb>狭</rb><rt>せま</rt></ruby>すぎるだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">If you’re going to live with your parents after getting married, then your present house is too small. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>急</rb><rt>いそ</rt></ruby>いで<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ってももう<ruby><rb>間</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>合</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>わないとなれば、<ruby><rb>焦</rb><rt>あせ</rt></ruby>ってもしかたがない。</span>／<span class="translation">If it’s already too late even if they rush there now, there’s no point in getting flustered.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ったことが<ruby><rb>全</rb><rt>すべ</rt></ruby>て<ruby><rb>嘘</rb><rt>うそ</rt></ruby>だとなれば、<ruby><rb>我々</rb><rt>われ われ</rt></ruby>はまんまとだまされていたことになる。</span>／<span class="translation">If everything he has said turns out to be a lie, it means that we have been completely deceived.</span></div><div class="explanation">Follows a clause to convey meanings such as “in such a case that...” or “in the case of such a situation...” or “based on such a fact....” Continues with expressions that indicate either an expected judgment or the proper action to take regarding the situation. Depending on the context, the form can be used for hypothetical conditions or already-realized situations.  </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x57905"><span class="number">2. </span>いざとなれば</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>手持</rb><rt>て も</rt></ruby>ちの<ruby><rb>現金</rb><rt>げん きん</rt></ruby>では<ruby><rb>足</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>りないかもしれないが、いざとなればクレジットカードを<ruby><rb>使</rb><rt>つか</rt></ruby>うことができる。</span>／<span class="translation">You may not have enough cash on hand, but if the need arises, you can use a credit card.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>一人</rb><rt>ひとり</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>留学</rb><rt>りゅう がく</rt></ruby>するのは<ruby><rb>不安</rb><rt>ふ あん</rt></ruby>だが、いざとなれば、<ruby><rb>友達</rb><rt>とも だち</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>助</rb><rt>たす</rt></ruby>けてくれるから<ruby><rb>大丈夫</rb><rt>だい じょう ぶ</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">I am worried about studying overseas by myself, but if something happens, I’ll be all right because my friends will help me.</span></div><div class="explanation">An idiomatic expression that means “in the event that such a situation were actually to arise.” Often used to express that, even if a difficult or unmanageable situation arises, things will be all right. Also takes the forms いざとなると and いざとなったら.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x57930"><span class="number">3. </span>N（のこと）となれば</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>いつもは<ruby><rb>生気</rb><rt>せい き</rt></ruby>のない<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>目</rb><rt>め</rt></ruby>もサッカーのこととなれば<ruby><rb>急</rb><rt>きゅう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>生</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>生</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>きと<ruby><rb>輝</rb><rt>かがや</rt></ruby>いてくる。</span>／<span class="translation">His usually lifeless eyes suddenly start to sparkle animatedly when the talk turns to soccer. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>脳死</rb><rt>のう し</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>問題</rb><rt>もん だい</rt></ruby>となれば<ruby><rb>学者</rb><rt>がく しゃ</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>安易</rb><rt>あん い</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>発言</rb><rt>はつ げん</rt></ruby>はできない。</span>／<span class="translation">When it comes to the issue of brain death, even scholars are not able to make simplistic statements.</span></div><div class="explanation">Follows a noun and means “when that becomes the topic of conversation.” Used to introduce something as a topic. Usually followed by expressions indicating that when that becomes the topic of conversation, a person’s (or people’s) attitude or way of handling things differs from the usual. </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x57955"><span class="number">4. </span>...かとなれば</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>どうすれば<ruby><rb>解決</rb><rt>かい けつ</rt></ruby>できるかとなれば、<ruby><rb>答</rb><rt>こた</rt></ruby>えは<ruby><rb>簡単</rb><rt>かん たん</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>てこないものだ。</span>／<span class="translation">When it comes to solving problems, the answer is not always easily found. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>首相</rb><rt>しゅ しょう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>発言</rb><rt>はつ げん</rt></ruby>どおり<ruby><rb>実行</rb><rt>じっ こう</rt></ruby>するかとなれば、<ruby><rb>必</rb><rt>かなら</rt></ruby>ずしもそうとばかりは<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>えない。</span>／<span class="translation">If you ask whether the prime minister will do exactly as he says, the answer is not necessarily yes. </span></div><div class="explanation">となれば is placed after an interrogative expression and means “when the matter of...becomes the topic/problem at hand.” Followed by a negative expression stating, for example, that solving or implementing something is difficult or impossible. Often used to contrast one situation with another and also bring up an important problem. For example, (2) means something like, “He does state his views, but when it comes to whether or not he acts on them when the time comes....”</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x57980"><span class="number">5. </span>Nともなれば<span class="reference">→<a href="part0635.xhtml#idtitlex1x59406">【ともなれば】</a></span></h2></body></html>