<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>けれども</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0203.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【けれど】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0205.xhtml">【げんざい】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x16294">【けれども】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x16296"><span class="number">1. </span>けれども</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>2<ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>待</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>った。けれども、<ruby><rb>一郎</rb><rt>いち ろう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>姿</rb><rt>すがた</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>現</rb><rt>あらわ</rt></ruby>さなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">I waited for two hours. However, Ichiro did not show up. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はな</rt></ruby>すのが<ruby><rb>下手</rb><rt>へ た</rt></ruby>だ。けれども、<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はな</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>かた</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>説得力</rb><rt>せっ とく りょく</rt></ruby>がある。</span>／<span class="translation">He is not good at speaking. And yet, his speaking style is persuasive. </span></div><div class="explanation">Same as けれど. </div><h4 class="reference">→<a href="part0203.xhtml#idtitlex1x16167">【けれど】</a></h4><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x16325"><span class="number">2. </span>...けれども</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>結婚式</rb><rt>けっ こん しき</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>日取</rb><rt>ひ ど</rt></ruby>りはまだ<ruby><rb>決</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>まっていないんですけれども、たぶん<ruby><rb>夏</rb><rt>なつ</rt></ruby>ごろになると<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>います。</span>／<span class="translation">The wedding date isn’t fixed yet, but I guess it will be sometime in summer. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>あの<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>とは<ruby><rb>仲良</rb><rt>なか よ</rt></ruby>く<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>をしたいと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>っているんですけれども、なかなかうまく<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>きません。</span>／<span class="translation">I would like to have a good working relationship with that person, but it isn’t going very well.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>このままずっとここにいたいけれども、いつか<ruby><rb>国</rb><rt>くに</rt></ruby>へ<ruby><rb>帰</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>らなければならない。</span>／<span class="translation">I would like to stay here forever, but I have to go back to my country at some point. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>これは<ruby><rb>正式</rb><rt>せい しき</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>発表</rb><rt>はっ ぴょう</rt></ruby>されていないんですけれども、<ruby><rb>近</rb><rt>ちか</rt></ruby>いうちに<ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>きな<ruby><rb>関心</rb><rt>かん しん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>呼</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>ぶことになると<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>います。</span>／<span class="translation">This hasn’t been announced officially, but I think it will attract great interest in the near future. </span></div><div class="explanation">Same as けれど. When placed after expressions in polite form, it can be used in official settings such as meetings.</div><h4 class="reference">→<a href="part0203.xhtml#idtitlex1x16167">【けれど】</a></h4></body></html>