<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>いらい</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0072.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【いまや】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0074.xhtml">【いわば】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x6603">【いらい】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x6605"><span class="number">1. </span>いらい</h2><h3 class="subsubtitle" id="idsubsubtitlex1x6608"><span class="number">a. </span>Nいらい</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>あれ<ruby><rb>以来</rb><rt>い らい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>姿</rb><rt>すがた</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>せない。</span>／<span class="translation">She hasn’t shown up since then.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>先週</rb><rt>せん しゅう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>以来</rb><rt>い らい</rt></ruby>ずっと<ruby><rb>会議</rb><rt>かい ぎ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>続</rb><rt>つづ</rt></ruby>きで、くたくたに<ruby><rb>疲</rb><rt>つか</rt></ruby>れきっている。</span>／<span class="translation">I’ m exhausted from the continuous meetings since last week. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>母</rb><rt>はは</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>去年</rb><rt>きょ ねん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>入院</rb><rt>にゅう いん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>以来</rb><rt>い らい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>気弱</rb><rt>き よわ</rt></ruby>になってしまった。</span>／<span class="translation">My mother has become shy and diffident since her time in the hospital last year.</span></div><div class="explanation">When いらい follows a noun that indicates a certain point in time or an event, it means “the whole time from then until now.”</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x6639"><span class="number">b. </span>V-ていらい</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>夏休</rb><rt>なつ やす</rt></ruby>みに<ruby><rb>風邪</rb><rt>か ぜ</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>寝込</rb><rt>ね こ</rt></ruby>んで<ruby><rb>以来</rb><rt>い らい</rt></ruby>、どうも<ruby><rb>体</rb><rt>からだ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>調子</rb><rt>ちょう し</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>悪</rb><rt>わる</rt></ruby>い。</span>／<span class="translation">I haven’t felt well since I was in bed with a cold during summer vacation.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>インドから<ruby><rb>帰</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>ってきて<ruby><rb>以来</rb><rt>い らい</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>はまるで<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>変</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>わったようだ。</span>／<span class="translation">It’s as if he has become another person since he came back from India. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>スポーツクラブに<ruby><rb>通</rb><rt>かよ</rt></ruby>うようになって<ruby><rb>以来</rb><rt>い らい</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>毎日</rb><rt>まい にち</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>生活</rb><rt>せい かつ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>張</rb><rt>は</rt></ruby>りが<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>てきた。</span>／<span class="translation">Since I began to go to the athletic club, I find everyday life is getting more enjoyable.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>この<ruby><rb>家</rb><rt>いえ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>引</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby>っ<ruby><rb>越</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>して<ruby><rb>以来</rb><rt>い らい</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>毎日</rb><rt>まい にち</rt></ruby>のようにいたずら<ruby><rb>電話</rb><rt>でん わ</rt></ruby>がかかる。</span>／<span class="translation">Since I moved to this house, I have been getting crank calls almost every day.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “the whole time from when an event happened in the past to the present time.”  Not used for the recent past.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>弟は夕方うちに帰ってきて以来、部屋に閉じ込もったきりだ。／Since my brother came home this evening, he has shut himself up in his room.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>弟は先月イギリス出張から帰ってきて以来、忙しくて毎晩夜中まで帰ってこない。／Since my brother came back from his business trip to England last month, he has been too busy to come home until late at night.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x6694"><span class="number">c. </span>V-ていらいはじめて</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>引</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby>っ<ruby><rb>越</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>してきて<ruby><rb>以来</rb><rt>い らい</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>初</rb><rt>はじ</rt></ruby>めて<ruby><rb>隣</rb><rt>となり</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>言葉</rb><rt>こと ば</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>交</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>わした。</span>／<span class="translation">It was my first time to exchange words with my neighbor since I moved in.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>大学</rb><rt>だい がく</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>はい</rt></ruby>って<ruby><rb>以来</rb><rt>い らい</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>初</rb><rt>はじ</rt></ruby>めて<ruby><rb>図書館</rb><rt>と しょ かん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>利用</rb><rt>り よう</rt></ruby>した。</span>／<span class="translation">This was my first time to use the library since I started university.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>この<ruby><rb>冬</rb><rt>ふゆ</rt></ruby>になって<ruby><rb>以来</rb><rt>い らい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>初</rb><rt>はじ</rt></ruby>めての<ruby><rb>寒波</rb><rt>かん ぱ</rt></ruby>で、<ruby><rb>死者</rb><rt>し しゃ</rt></ruby>が6<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>にん</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>た。</span>／<span class="translation">Six lives were lost in the first cold wave of this winter.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses that something has occurred for the first time after quite a long time/since a certain point in the past.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x6725"><span class="number">2. </span>Nは、...いらいだ</h2><h4 class="info">［Nは、Nいらいだ］</h4><h4 class="info">［Nは、V-ていらいだ］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>お<ruby><rb>会</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>いするのは、<ruby><rb>去年</rb><rt>きょ ねん</rt></ruby>の9<ruby><rb>月以来</rb><rt>がつ い らい</rt></ruby>ですね。</span>／<span class="translation">We haven’t met each other since last September. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>海外旅行</rb><rt>かい がい りょ こう</rt></ruby>はおととしトルコに<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>って<ruby><rb>以来</rb><rt>い らい</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">I haven’t traveled abroad since I went to Turkey the year before last.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>数学</rb><rt>すう がく</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>問題</rb><rt>もん だい</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>解</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>いたのは<ruby><rb>大学</rb><rt>だい がく</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>入試</rb><rt>にゅう し</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>以来</rb><rt>い らい</rt></ruby>のことだから、もう<ruby><rb>何年</rb><rt>なん ねん</rt></ruby>ぶりになるだろうか。</span>／<span class="translation">I haven’t solved any math problems since my university entrance exam, so I wonder how many years it’s been.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>郷里</rb><rt>きょう り</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>帰</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>るのは、7<ruby><rb>年前</rb><rt>ねん まえ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>祖父</rb><rt>そ ふ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>法事</rb><rt>ほう じ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>た<ruby><rb>時</rb><rt>とき</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>以来</rb><rt>い らい</rt></ruby>なので、<ruby><rb>町</rb><rt>まち</rt></ruby>はかなり<ruby><rb>様子</rb><rt>よう す</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>変</rb><rt>かわ</rt></ruby>っていた。</span>／<span class="translation">I hadn’t returned to my hometown since I went to my grandfather’s memorial service seven years ago, so the town had changed a lot. </span></div><div class="explanation">When いらいだ follows words that express a point in the past or a past event, it expresses that a long time has passed since.</div></body></html>