<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>からこそ</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0156.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【からいったら】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0158.xhtml">【からしたら】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x13186">【からこそ】</h1><h4 class="info">［N／Na　だからこそ］</h4><h4 class="info">［A／V　からこそ］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>これは<ruby><rb>運</rb><rt>うん</rt></ruby>じゃない。<ruby><rb>努力</rb><rt>ど りょく</rt></ruby>したからこそ<ruby><rb>成功</rb><rt>せい こう</rt></ruby>したんだ。</span>／<span class="translation">This wasn’t just luck. It’s because I made an effort that I succeeded.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>君</rb><rt>きみ</rt></ruby>はぼくを<ruby><rb>正当</rb><rt>せい とう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>評価</rb><rt>ひょう か</rt></ruby>していない。</span>／<span class="translation">You’re not giving me a fair evaluation.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span><ruby><rb>評価</rb><rt>ひょう か</rt></ruby>しているからこそ、もっとまじめにやれと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>っているんだ。　</span>／<span class="translation">It’s precisely because I think so much of you that I’m telling you to try even harder.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>愛</rb><rt>あい</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>終</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>わったから<ruby><rb>別</rb><rt>わか</rt></ruby>れるのではなく、<ruby><rb>愛</rb><rt>あい</rt></ruby>するからこそ<ruby><rb>別</rb><rt>わか</rt></ruby>れるという<ruby><rb>場合</rb><rt>ば あい</rt></ruby>もあるのだ。</span>／<span class="translation">There are times when a couple breaks up not because their love is gone but because they still do love each other.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>忙</rb><rt>いそが</rt></ruby>しくて<ruby><rb>自分</rb><rt>じ ぶん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby>がないという<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>がいるが、<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>忙</rb><rt>いそが</rt></ruby>しいからこそ<ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>有効</rb><rt>ゆう こう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>使</rb><rt>つか</rt></ruby>って<ruby><rb>自分</rb><rt>じ ぶん</rt></ruby>のための<ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>作</rb><rt>つく</rt></ruby>っているのだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Some people say that they’re too busy and don’t have time for themselves, but it’s just because I am so busy that I make the best use of time and also make time for myself.</span></div><div class="explanation">An expression that focuses on and emphasizes the reason or cause for something. Often used with のだ. Addition of こそ conveys the strong conviction of the speaker with respect to the reason expressed in the preceding phrase, so this pattern cannot be used to express a cause-effect relation objectively. のだis often used to end the sentence.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>今、東京は朝の9時だからこそ、ロンドンは夜中の 12 時だ。／Just because it’s nine o’clock in the morning in Tokyo, it’s midnight in London.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>今、東京は朝の9時だから、ロンドンは夜中の 12 時だ。／Now it’s nine o’clock in the morning in Tokyo, so it’s midnight in London.</div></body></html>