<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>あげる</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0013.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【あげく】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0015.xhtml">【あたかも】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x741">【あげる】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x746"><span class="number">1. </span>R-あげる〈upward direction〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>男</rb><rt>おとこ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>きな<ruby><rb>岩</rb><rt>いわ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>軽々</rb><rt>かる がる</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>持</rb><rt>も</rt></ruby>ち<ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>げた。</span>／<span class="translation">The man lifted a big rock effortlessly. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>先生</rb><rt>せん せい</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>漫画</rb><rt>まん が</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>本</rb><rt>ほん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>取</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>り<ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>げられた。</span>／<span class="translation">The teacher took away my comic book. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>髪</rb><rt>かみ</rt></ruby>をかき<ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>げる<ruby><rb>仕草</rb><rt>し ぐさ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>ているのが<ruby><rb>好</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>きだ。</span>／<span class="translation">I like to see her combing her hair and pulling it back.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>はあたりかまわず<ruby><rb>声</rb><rt>こえ</rt></ruby>をはり<ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>げて<ruby><rb>泣</rb><rt>な</rt></ruby>きわめいた。</span>／<span class="translation">Disregarding those around her, she screamed and cried.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>その<ruby><rb>土地</rb><rt>と ち</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>自治体</rb><rt>じ ち たい</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>げて<ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>きな<ruby><rb>遊園地</rb><rt>ゆう えん ち</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>作</rb><rt>つく</rt></ruby>ることに<ruby><rb>決</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>まった。</span>／<span class="translation">The local government decided to buy up that land and build a big amusement park. </span></div><div class="explanation">あげる, when joined to a verb stem, means an action to make an object move upward. It is also used figuratively, in (4) and (5). </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x792"><span class="number">2. </span>R-あげる〈accomplishment〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>大事</rb><rt>だい じ</rt></ruby>なお<ruby><rb>客</rb><rt>きゃく</rt></ruby>さんが<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>るので、<ruby><rb>母</rb><rt>はは</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>家中</rb><rt>いえ じゅう</rt></ruby>をぴかぴかにみがき<ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>げた。</span>／<span class="translation">Because an important guest is coming, my mother cleaned up the whole house. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>原稿</rb><rt>げん こう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>用紙</rb><rt>よう し</rt></ruby>500<ruby><rb>枚</rb><rt>まい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>小説</rb><rt>しょう せつ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>一気</rb><rt>いっ き</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>書</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>げた。</span>／<span class="translation">He dashed off the whole novel of five hundred pages. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>クリスマスまでに<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>とかセーターを<ruby><rb>編</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>み<ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>げてプレゼントしようと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>っていたのに。</span>／<span class="translation">I thought I would somehow be able to finish knitting the sweater before Christmas and give it as a present.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>刑事</rb><rt>けい じ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>犯人</rb><rt>はん にん</rt></ruby>をロープで<ruby><rb>身動</rb><rt>み うご</rt></ruby>きできないようにしばり<ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>げた。</span>／<span class="translation">The detective tied up the criminal with a rope so he wasn’t able to move.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>みんなで<ruby><rb>一晩中</rb><rt>ひと ばん じゅう</rt></ruby>かかってまとめ<ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>げたデータが<ruby><rb>何者</rb><rt>なに もの</rt></ruby>かに<ruby><rb>盗</rb><rt>ぬす</rt></ruby>まれた。</span>／<span class="translation">The data which we took all night to complete were stolen by someone.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span>この<ruby><rb>織物</rb><rt>おり もの</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>草</rb><rt>くさ</rt></ruby>や<ruby><rb>木</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>根</rb><rt>ね</rt></ruby>などを<ruby><rb>集</rb><rt>あつ</rt></ruby>めてきて<ruby><rb>染</rb><rt>そ</rt></ruby>めた<ruby><rb>糸</rb><rt>いと</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>丹念</rb><rt>たん ねん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>織</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>り<ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>げたものだ。</span>／<span class="translation">This textile is woven very elaborately with yarn which was dyed with grass and tree roots. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（7）</span><ruby><rb>何年</rb><rt>なん ねん</rt></ruby>もかかって<ruby><rb>築</rb><rt>きず</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>げてきた<ruby><rb>信頼</rb><rt>しん らい</rt></ruby>が、たった<ruby><rb>一度</rb><rt>いち ど</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>過</rb><rt>あやま</rt></ruby>ちで<ruby><rb>崩</rb><rt>くず</rt></ruby>れてしまった。</span>／<span class="translation">The confidence that was built up over many years has collapsed because of a single mistake.  </span></div><div class="explanation">When joined to a verb stem, あげる expresses the accomplishment or completion of an act. With verbs of creation, such as 書くor 編む, it means to complete. It includes a sense of the effort needed to accomplish the act.    </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x847"><span class="number">3. </span>R-てあげる<span class="reference">→<a href="part0442.xhtml#idtitlex1x38967">【てあげる】</a></span></h2></body></html>