<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>といえば</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0532.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【といえなくもない】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0534.xhtml">【といけない】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x50172">【といえば】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x50174"><span class="number">1. </span>Nといえば</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>川口</rb><rt>かわ ぐち</rt></ruby>さんといえば、どこへ<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ったのか、<ruby><rb>姿</rb><rt>すがた</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>えませんね。</span>／<span class="translation">Now that you mention Kawaguchi-san, where has she gone? I don’t see her here, do you?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>高木</rb><rt>たか ぎ</rt></ruby>さんといえば<ruby><rb>切手</rb><rt>きっ て</rt></ruby>というぐらい、<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>収集熱</rb><rt>しゅう しゅう ねつ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>有名</rb><rt>ゆう めい</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">If you say “Takagi-san,” it’s almost the same as saying “stamps”—that’s how well-known his obsession with collecting them is.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>森町</rb><rt>もり まち</rt></ruby>といえば、<ruby><rb>昔</rb><rt>むかし</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>木材</rb><rt>もく ざい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>産地</rb><rt>さん ち</rt></ruby>だが、<ruby><rb>最近</rb><rt>さい きん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>温泉</rb><rt>おん せん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>吹</rb><rt>ふ</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>だ</rt></ruby>して<ruby><rb>話題</rb><rt>わ だい</rt></ruby>になっている。</span>／<span class="translation">Speaking of the town of Mori, it’s been a lumber production area since long ago, but recently people are talking about it because of the new hot spring that’s gushed up.</span></div><div class="explanation">This expression is used to take a certain topic and describe what it brings to mind, add further explanation about it, etc. It is also possible to say というと.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x50205"><span class="number">2. </span>...といえば...が</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>おっとりしているといえば、<ruby><rb>聞</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>こえがいいが、<ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なに</rt></ruby>をするのものろい。</span>／<span class="translation">If you say that she’s easygoing, it sounds good, but really she is slow at everything.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>緑</rb><rt>みどり</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>豊</rb><rt>ゆた</rt></ruby>かだといえば、いい<ruby><rb>所</rb><rt>ところ</rt></ruby>だと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>うが、<ruby><rb>実際</rb><rt>じっ さい</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>遠</rb><rt>とお</rt></ruby>くて<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>くのが<ruby><rb>大変</rb><rt>たい へん</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">You might think it’s a wonderful place when you hear about the abundant green forests, but the fact is that it’s far away and really hard to get to.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>一日</rb><rt>いち にち</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>一回</rb><rt>いっ かい</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>部下</rb><rt>ぶ か</rt></ruby>をどなりつけるといえば、こわい<ruby><rb>上司</rb><rt>じょう し</rt></ruby>だと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>われるが、<ruby><rb>実際</rb><rt>じっ さい</rt></ruby>はみんなにしたわれている。</span>／<span class="translation">When you hear that she yells at her subordinates at least once a day you might think she’s an intimidating boss, but the truth is that everyone adores her.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to state two contrasting evaluations. Means that if you consider things from the viewpoint of statement X, normally evaluation Y would result, but in fact the result is Z, a contrasting evaluation.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x50236"><span class="number">3. </span>...といえば...かもしれない</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>らはビートルズの<ruby><rb>再来</rb><rt>さい らい</rt></ruby>だといえば、ほめすぎかもしれない。</span>／<span class="translation">To say that they’re the next Beatles might be making too much of them.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>この<ruby><rb>議会</rb><rt>ぎ かい</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>までで<ruby><rb>最低</rb><rt>さい てい</rt></ruby>だといえば、<ruby><rb>問題</rb><rt>もん だい</rt></ruby>があるかもしれない。</span>／<span class="translation">If they say this is the worst assembly ever, there might be a problem.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>この<ruby><rb>作品</rb><rt>さく ひん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>時代</rb><rt>じ だい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>流</rb><rt>なが</rt></ruby>れを<ruby><rb>変</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>えるといえば、あまりにおおげさかもしれないが、<ruby><rb>実際</rb><rt>じっ さい</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>ればその<ruby><rb>素晴</rb><rt>す ば</rt></ruby>らしさがわかるだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">Saying that this work (of art) would change the course of the times might be too much of an exaggeration, but you’ll understand how splendid it is if you actually see it.</span></div><div class="explanation">This is a roundabout way of expressing an evaluation. The second clause lessens the impact of the evaluation given in the first. The evaluation in the first clause is often what the speaker wants to claim, and a statement that affirms and further develops this evaluation often follows the second clause, as in (3).</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x50267"><span class="number">4. </span>...といえば...ぐらいのことだ</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>わたしの<ruby><rb>得意</rb><rt>とく い</rt></ruby>なことといえば、ビールの<ruby><rb>早</rb><rt>はや</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>飲</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>みぐらいのことだ。</span>／<span class="translation">If I have to say something I’m good at, the only thing is chugging beer.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>町</rb><rt>まち</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>名所</rb><rt>めい しょ</rt></ruby>といえば、<ruby><rb>小</rb><rt>ちい</rt></ruby>さい<ruby><rb>古墳</rb><rt>こ ふん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>残</rb><rt>のこ</rt></ruby>っているぐらいのことだ。</span>／<span class="translation">The only famous site left in this town is just a small ancient burial mound.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>うちの<ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>のとりえといえば、<ruby><rb>動物</rb><rt>どう ぶつ</rt></ruby>をかわいがるぐらいのことだ。</span>／<span class="translation">What are our child’s good points? I guess I could say that he’s kind to animals.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to say that the topic at hand (a person or thing) does not have many outstanding features. Often used to make self-effacing statements about oneself.</div></body></html>