<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>よかろう</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part1034.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【よかった】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part1036.xhtml">【よぎなくさせる】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x104174">【よかろう】</h1><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>のんびりしたいのなら、<ruby><rb>観光地</rb><rt>かん こう ち</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>くよりは<ruby><rb>温泉</rb><rt>おん せん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>ほう</rt></ruby>がよかろう。</span>／<span class="translation">If you want to relax, rather than going to a sightseeing area, it would be better to go to a hot spring.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>どうせみんな<ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby>どおりには<ruby><rb>集</rb><rt>あつ</rt></ruby>まらないのだから、<ruby><rb>少</rb><rt>すこ</rt></ruby>しぐらい<ruby><rb>遅</rb><rt>おく</rt></ruby>れて<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ってもよかろう。</span>／<span class="translation">Anyhow, as everyone will not assemble on time, I suppose it would be okay for us to go a little late.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>医者</rb><rt>い しゃ</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>止</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>められているが、<ruby><rb>少々</rb><rt>しょう しょう</rt></ruby>ならよかろうと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>ってビールを1<ruby><rb>杯</rb><rt>ぱい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>飲</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>んだのが<ruby><rb>間違</rb><rt>ま ちが</rt></ruby>いだった。</span>／<span class="translation">I was stopped by the doctor but, thinking just a little would be okay, I made the mistake of drinking a glass of beer.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>どうせすぐに<ruby><rb>戻</rb><rt>もど</rt></ruby>ってくるんだから、<ruby><rb>車</rb><rt>くるま</rt></ruby>はここに<ruby><rb>止</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>めておけばよかろう。</span>／<span class="translation">I’ll be back straight away and so I suppose it’s okay to leave the car here.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>荷物</rb><rt>に もつ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>運</rb><rt>はこ</rt></ruby>ぶのは<ruby><rb>若</rb><rt>わか</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>者</rb><rt>もの</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>任</rb><rt>まか</rt></ruby>せたらよかろう。</span>／<span class="translation">It’s better to leave carrying the luggage to the youngsters.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span>どうしても<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>きたければアマゾンでもどこでも<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>くがよかろう。ただし、<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なに</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>起</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>こっても<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>らないぞ。</span>／<span class="translation">If you really want to go, it doesn’t matter if you go to the Amazon or anywhere but, whatever happens, I know nothing about it.</span></div><div class="explanation">This, like いいだろう and かまわないだろう is a conjectural form of よい. As in example (6), it can be used to give permission in the form ...がよかろう. In speech it is rarely used by young people. </div></body></html>