<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>なら3</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0707.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【なら<sub class="variation">2</sub>】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0709.xhtml">【ならいい】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x65888">【なら<sub class="variation">3</sub>】</h1><h4 class="info">［N／Na　（だった）なら］</h4><h4 class="info">［A-い／A-かった　なら］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-る／V-た　なら］</h4><div class="explanation">In contrast with Usage 2 of なら, Usage 3 does not take the pattern のなら. Usage 3 is used in the form なら or ならば and is equivalent to the <i>ba</i>-form of N/Naだ. However, it can also be used after the dictionary form or the <i>ta</i>-form of a verb or <i>i</i>-adjective. When Usage 3 of なら is preceded by a verb or an <i>i</i>-adjective, it can be replaced by ば or たら with very little change in meaning. たなら is an emphatic form of たら and sounds a little old-fashioned.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x65919"><span class="number">1. </span>N／Na　なら（ば）</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>10 <ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>にん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>一緒</rb><rt>いっ しょ</rt></ruby>なら<ruby><rb>団体</rb><rt>だん たい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>割</rb><rt>わ</rt></ruby>り<ruby><rb>引</rb><rt>び</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>料金</rb><rt>りょう きん</rt></ruby>になる。</span>／<span class="translation">Groups of ten get a reduced rate.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>まわりがもう<ruby><rb>少</rb><rt>すこ</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>静</rb><rt>しず</rt></ruby>かならば<ruby><rb>落</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>ち<ruby><rb>着</rb><rt>つ</rt></ruby>いて<ruby><rb>勉強</rb><rt>べん きょう</rt></ruby>できるのですが。</span>／<span class="translation">If it were a little quieter around here, I could settle down and study.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>東京</rb><rt>とう きょう</rt></ruby>ならこんなに<ruby><rb>安</rb><rt>やす</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>家賃</rb><rt>や ちん</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>家</rb><rt>いえ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>借</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>りられません。</span>／<span class="translation">If this were Tokyo, you would never be able to rent a house for such a low price.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>その<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はなし</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>本当</rb><rt>ほん  とう</rt></ruby>なら<ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>たい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>変</rb><rt>へん</rt></ruby>なことになりますよ。</span>／<span class="translation">If that story is true, you’re going to be in big trouble.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>があなたならそんなふうには<ruby><rb>考</rb><rt>かんが</rt></ruby>えなかったと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>う。</span>／<span class="translation">If I were you, I wouldn’t have thought like that.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>日曜日</rb><rt>にち よう び</rt></ruby>、お<ruby><rb>天気</rb><rt>てん き</rt></ruby>ならハイキングに<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>きましょう。</span>／<span class="translation">If the weather’s nice on Sunday, let’s go hiking.</span></div><div class="explanation">N/Naなら(ば) is the <i>ba</i>-form of N/Naだ. It expresses a hypothetical condition, such as “if such-and-such was the case” or “supposing that...,” or a counter-factual condition, such as “if the circumstances were the other way around.” In formal written Japanese, であれば, which is the <i>ba</i>-form of である, can also be used. N/Naなら(ば) can be replaced by だったら.</div><div class="explanation">The difference between Usage 3 of なら and Usage 1 is that Usage 1 attaches to nouns only and means “if N were the topic,” while Usage 3 expresses a supposition (if it were the case that...) regarding something that is either not known to be true, or is contrary to fact. However, in many cases it is difficult to decide which usage of なら actually applies.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x65984"><span class="number">2. </span>NがNならNはNだ</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>銀座</rb><rt>ぎん ざ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>東京</rb><rt>とう きょう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>中心</rb><rt>ちゅう しん</rt></ruby>なら<ruby><rb>心斎橋</rb><rt>しん さい ばし</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>大阪</rb><rt>おお さか</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>中心</rb><rt>ちゅう しん</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">If Ginza is the center of Tokyo, Shinsaibashi is the center of Osaka.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>パリが<ruby><rb>芸術</rb><rt>げい じゅつ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>都</rb><rt>みやこ</rt></ruby>なら、ロンドンは<ruby><rb>金融</rb><rt>きん ゆう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>都</rb><rt>みやこ</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">If Paris is the city of art, London is the city of finance. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>兄</rb><rt>あに</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>努力型</rb><rt>ど りょく がた</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>秀才</rb><rt>しゅう さい</rt></ruby>なら<ruby><rb>弟</rb><rt>おとうと</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>天才型</rb><rt>てん さい がた</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>秀才</rb><rt>しゅう さい</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">If the older brother is the hard-working prodigy type, the younger brother is the genius type.</span></div><div class="explanation">NがNならNはNだ is used to compare people or things that have contrasting characteristics. Each person or thing is likened to something different (using different terms), and the pattern itself means “if ...can be expressed as ..., then ...can be expressed as ....”</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x66015"><span class="number">3. </span>NがNならNもNだ</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>親</rb><rt>おや</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>親</rb><rt>おや</rt></ruby>なら<ruby><rb>子</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>子</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">What can you expect from a child with parents like that? (lit. Like parent, like child.)</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>先生</rb><rt>せん せい</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>先生</rb><rt>せん せい</rt></ruby>なら<ruby><rb>学生</rb><rt>がく せい</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>学生</rb><rt>がく せい</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">What can you expect from students with a teacher like that?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>亭主</rb><rt>てい しゅ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>亭主</rb><rt>てい しゅ</rt></ruby>なら<ruby><rb>女房</rb><rt>にょう ぼう</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>女房</rb><rt>にょう ぼう</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">Both the husband and wife are hopeless.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>アメリカもアメリカなら<ruby><rb>日本</rb><rt>に ほん</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>日本</rb><rt>に ほん</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">Both America and Japan are equally to blame. </span></div><div class="explanation">The N slots in the pattern NがNならNもNだ are filled by pairs of nouns that represent people in a relationship, such as “husband” and “wife,” or institutions, organizations, etc. This pattern expresses a negative evaluation of the behavior or attitude of the people or organizations in question and means “both of them are equally terrible” or “they’re a totally outrageous bunch of people.” It is used to describe two parties with undesirable characteristics or attitudes, such as being thoughtless, lazy, impertinent, or rude. This pattern also takes the form N1もN1ならN2もN2だ, as in (4).</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x66052"><span class="number">4. </span>...なら（ば）</h2><h4 class="info">［A／V　なら（ば）］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>今年</rb><rt>ことし</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>真夏</rb><rt>ま なつ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>日照</rb><rt>にっ しょう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>短</rb><rt>みじか</rt></ruby>い</span>／<span class="translation"><ruby><rb>短</rb><rt>みじか</rt></ruby>かったならば<ruby><rb>米不足</rb><rt>こめ ぶ そく</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>問題</rb><rt>もん だい</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>深刻</rb><rt>しん こく</rt></ruby>だ。／If there are too few hours of mid-summer sunlight again this year, the shortage of rice will be a serious problem.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>この<ruby><rb>機会</rb><rt>き かい</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>逃</rb><rt>のが</rt></ruby>す</span>／<span class="translation"><ruby><rb>逃</rb><rt>のが</rt></ruby>したならばもう2<ruby><rb>度</rb><rt>ど</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>会</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>えないだろう。／If I miss this opportunity, I’m afraid I’ll never be able to see him again.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>このまま<ruby><rb>不況</rb><rt>ふ きょう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>続</rb><rt>つづ</rt></ruby>く</span>／<span class="translation"><ruby><rb>続</rb><rt>つづ</rt></ruby>いたなら<ruby><rb>失業</rb><rt>しつぎょう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>問題</rb><rt>もん だい</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>深刻</rb><rt>しん こく</rt></ruby>になる。／If the recession continues like this, the unemployment problem will become critical.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>今後</rb><rt>こん ご</rt></ruby>1<ruby><rb>週間</rb><rt>しゅう かん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>雨</rb><rt>あめ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>降</rb><rt>ふ</rt></ruby>らない</span>／<span class="translation"><ruby><rb>降</rb><rt>ふ</rt></ruby>らなかったならば<ruby><rb>水不足</rb><rt>みず ぶ そく</rt></ruby>になる。／If it doesn’t rain in the next week, there will be a shortage of water.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used with the dictionary form or the <i>ta</i>-form of an <i>i-</i>adjective or verb, なら(ば) means “in the event that such a situation is realized.” It is a hypothetical conditional used to state an assumption about a situation that may be realized in the future, as well as a prediction about something that will happen if that situation is realized. なら(ば) is similar in meaning to するなら and したなら. It is a literary expression that often appears in editorial or academic texts. It can be replaced by ば and たら, and in spoken Japanese the latter are more commonly used.</div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>今年</rb><rt>ことし</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>真夏</rb><rt>ま なつ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>日照</rb><rt>にっしょう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby>が｛<ruby><rb>短</rb><rt>みじか</rt></ruby>ければ</span>／<span class="translation"><ruby><rb>短</rb><rt>みじか</rt></ruby>かったら｝<ruby><rb>米不足</rb><rt>こめ ぶ そく</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>問題</rb><rt>もん だい</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>深刻</rb><rt>しん こく</rt></ruby>だ。／If there are too few hours of mid-summer sunlight again this year, the shortage of rice will be a serious problem.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span>この<ruby><rb>機会</rb><rt>き かい</rt></ruby>を｛<ruby><rb>逃</rb><rt>のが</rt></ruby>せば</span>／<span class="translation"><ruby><rb>逃</rb><rt>のが</rt></ruby>したら｝もう2<ruby><rb>度</rb><rt>ど</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>会</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>えないだろう。／If I miss this opportunity, I’m afraid I’ll never be able to see him again.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（7）</span>このまま<ruby><rb>不況</rb><rt>ふ きょう</rt></ruby>が｛<ruby><rb>続</rb><rt>つづ</rt></ruby>けば</span>／<span class="translation"><ruby><rb>続</rb><rt>つづ</rt></ruby>いたら｝<ruby><rb>失業</rb><rt>しつぎょう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>問題</rb><rt>もん だい</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>深刻</rb><rt>しん こく</rt></ruby>になる。／If the recession continues like this, the unemployment problem will become critical.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（8）</span><ruby><rb>今後</rb><rt>こん ご</rt></ruby>1<ruby><rb>週間</rb><rt>しゅう かん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>雨</rb><rt>あめ</rt></ruby>が｛<ruby><rb>降</rb><rt>ふ</rt></ruby>らなければ</span>／<span class="translation"><ruby><rb>降</rb><rt>ふ</rt></ruby>らなかったら｝<ruby><rb>水不足</rb><rt>みず ぶ そく</rt></ruby>になる。／If it doesn’t rain in the next week, there will be a shortage of water.</span></div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x66121"><span class="number">5. </span>...たなら</h2><h4 class="info">［N／Na　だったなら］</h4><h4 class="info">［A-かったなら］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-たなら］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>全能</rb><rt>ぜん のう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>神様</rb><rt>かみ さま</rt></ruby>だったなら、あなたを<ruby><rb>助</rb><rt>たす</rt></ruby>けてあげられるのに。</span>／<span class="translation">If I were the Almighty God, I could help you.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>もう<ruby><rb>少</rb><rt>すこ</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>発見</rb><rt>はっ けん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>早</rb><rt>はや</rt></ruby>かったなら<ruby><rb>助</rb><rt>たす</rt></ruby>かったのに。</span>／<span class="translation">If only she had been found a little earlier, she would have been saved. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>困</rb><rt>こま</rt></ruby>ることがあったならいつでも<ruby><rb>相談</rb><rt>そう だん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>い。</span>／<span class="translation">Come and talk to me anytime you have a problem.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>もしも<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>翼</rb><rt>つばさ</rt></ruby>があったなら<ruby><rb>大空</rb><rt>おお ぞら</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>自由</rb><rt>じ ゆう</rt></ruby>にかけまわりたい。</span>／<span class="translation">If I had wings, I would like to fly freely all over the open sky.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>《<ruby><rb>歌詞</rb><rt>か し</rt></ruby>》あの<ruby><rb>坂</rb><rt>さか</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>越</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>えたなら<ruby><rb>幸</rb><rt>しあわ</rt></ruby>せが<ruby><rb>待</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>っている。</span>／<span class="translation">《song》Happiness awaits over that hill.</span></div><div class="explanation">...たなら, an emphatic form of たら that sounds a little old-fashioned, is used to express hypothetical or counter-factual conditions. It is often used in the lyrics of popular songs, but in daily conversation たら is more common.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x66173"><span class="number">6. </span>V-るなら〈viewpoint〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>事情</rb><rt>じ じょう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>らない<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>目</rb><rt>め</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>るなら、<ruby><rb>少</rb><rt>すこ</rt></ruby>しおおげさな<ruby><rb>感</rb><rt>かん</rt></ruby>じがするかもしれない。</span>／<span class="translation">In the eyes of someone who doesn’t know the actual situation, it may seem a bit blown out of proportion.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>わせるなら、この<ruby><rb>作品</rb><rt>さく ひん</rt></ruby>はあまり<ruby><rb>面白</rb><rt>おも しろ</rt></ruby>いとは<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>えない。</span>／<span class="translation">If you ask me, I don’t think this piece is all that interesting.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>戦前</rb><rt>せん ぜん</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>比</rb><rt>くら</rt></ruby>べるなら<ruby><rb>生活</rb><rt>せい かつ</rt></ruby>レベルはずいぶん<ruby><rb>向上</rb><rt>こう じょう</rt></ruby>したといえるだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">We can say that the standard of living has improved considerably, compared with before the war.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>一部</rb><rt>いち ぶ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>除</rb><rt>のぞ</rt></ruby>くなら、<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>意見</rb><rt>い けん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>正</rb><rt>ただ</rt></ruby>しいと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>う。</span>／<span class="translation">Except for some parts, I think his opinion is correct. </span></div><div class="explanation">When the dictionary form of verbs such as 見る, 言う, and 比べる is followed by なら, the result is an idiomatic expression that indicates the viewpoint from which a judgment or opinion (given in the subsequent clause) is stated. This pattern tends to be used in written Japanese. たら／と／ば can also be used with these verbs, and the resulting forms are, for the most part, interchangeable with V-るなら. Similar expressions include ...によるなら and ...を別にするなら.</div></body></html>