<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>べからざる</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0915.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ぶん】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0917.xhtml">【べからず】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x84848">【べからざる】</h1><h4 class="info">［V-るべからざる］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>川端</rb><rt>かわばた</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>康成</rb><rt>やすなり</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>日本</rb><rt>に ほん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>文学史</rb><rt>ぶん がく し</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>じょう</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>欠</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>くべからざる<ruby><rb>作家</rb><rt>さっ か</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">Kawabata Yasunari is a writer who could not be omitted in any history of Japanese literature.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>大臣</rb><rt>だい じん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>地位</rb><rt>ち い</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>利用</rb><rt>り よう</rt></ruby>して、<ruby><rb>企業</rb><rt>き ぎょう</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>多額</rb><rt>た がく</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>金</rb><rt>かね</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>受</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>け<ruby><rb>取</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>るなどは、<ruby><rb>政治家</rb><rt>せい じ か</rt></ruby>として<ruby><rb>許</rb><rt>ゆる</rt></ruby>すべからざる<ruby><rb>犯罪</rb><rt>はん ざい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>行為</rb><rt>こう い</rt></ruby>である。</span>／<span class="translation">It is an unforgivable criminal act for a politician to use his or her position as a government minister to receive large sums of money from companies.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>いかなる<ruby><rb>理由</rb><rt>り ゆう</rt></ruby>があったにせよ、<ruby><rb>警官</rb><rt>けい かん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>一般</rb><rt>いっ ぱん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>市民</rb><rt>し みん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>暴行</rb><rt>ぼう こう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>加</rb><rt>くわ</rt></ruby>えるなど、あり<ruby><rb>得</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>べからざる<ruby><rb>異常事態</rb><rt>い じょう じ たい</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">Whatever the reason, it is beyond belief that a policeman should use physical violence on an ordinary citizen.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used in the form of べからざるN. It is the classical written language version of べきでないN. It indicates that the action or the state is not right or undesirable and means ...ことができないN or ...てはいけないN (N that cannot do something or N that should not do something).</div><div class="explanation">(1) means that the person cannot be omitted or must not be forgotten. (2) means that the criminal act is so terrible that it should be stopped. (3) refers to an incident that would not/should not take place.</div><div class="explanation">A limited number of verbs can take this form. As in the cases of (1)-(3), it is often used in idiomatic phrases such as 欠くべからざる人物, 許すべからざる行為, あり得べからざる事態. Note that in the case of 得る in (3), べからざる is attached to 得, forming 得べからざる. It is a formal written language style. Also note that the pronunciation of 得 in 得べからざる is <i>u</i> rather than <i>e</i>.</div></body></html>