<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ところだ</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0579.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ところが】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0581.xhtml">【ところで】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x54758">【ところだ】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x54763"><span class="number">1. </span>Vところだ〈phase of a situation〉</h2><div class="explanation">ところだ attaches to verbs and is used to report the current status or progress of a situation or event. ところだった expresses that something was at a certain stage in the past. The expression ところだ itself does not usually appear in negative or interrogative forms. The preceding verb does not usually take the negative form, either.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x54776"><span class="number">a. </span>V-たところだ</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>帰</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>ってきたところです。</span>／<span class="translation">I just got home. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>海外</rb><rt>かい がい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>勤務</rb><rt>きん む</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>終</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>え、<ruby><rb>先月</rb><rt>せん げつ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>帰国</rb><rt>き こく</rt></ruby>したところです。</span>／<span class="translation">I finished my overseas assignment and returned home just last month. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>電話</rb><rt>でん わ</rt></ruby>したら、あいにくちょっと<ruby><rb>前</rb><rt>まえ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>かけたところだった。</span>／<span class="translation">When I called, unfortunately she had just stepped out a little earlier. </span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses the stage immediately after an action or change has taken place. Often used with adverbs that refer to the time immediately preceding, such as 今 (now), さっき (just a moment ago), or ちょっと前 (a little while ago).</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x54807"><span class="number">b. </span>V-ているところだ</h3><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><span class="number">A:</span>もしもし、<ruby><rb>和雄</rb><rt>かず お</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>君</rb><rt>くん</rt></ruby>いますか。</span>／<span class="translation">Hello, is Kazuo-kun there?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span><ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>お<ruby><rb>風呂</rb><rt>ふ ろ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>はい</rt></ruby>っているところなんです。</span>／<span class="translation">Right now he is taking a bath. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>だだ<ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>電話</rb><rt>でん わ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>番号</rb><rt>ばんごう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>調</rb><rt>しら</rt></ruby>べているところですので、もう<ruby><rb>少々</rb><rt>しょう しょう</rt></ruby>お<ruby><rb>待</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>ちください。</span>／<span class="translation">I am looking up that phone number right now, so please wait a few moments.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>ふすまを<ruby><rb>開</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>けると、<ruby><rb>妻</rb><rt>つま</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>着物</rb><rt>き もの</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>片付</rb><rt>かた づ</rt></ruby>けているところだった。</span>／<span class="translation">When I slid the doors open, my wife was in the middle of putting her <i>kimono</i> away. </span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses that an action is currently in progress.  </div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x54853"><span class="number">c. </span>V-ていたところだ</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>いい<ruby><rb>時</rb><rt>とき</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>電話</rb><rt>でん わ</rt></ruby>をくれました。<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>もちょうどあなたに<ruby><rb>電話</rb><rt>でん わ</rt></ruby>しようと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>っていたところなんです。</span>／<span class="translation">You’ve called at a good time. I was just thinking about giving you a call, too.  </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>いがけなくも<ruby><rb>留学</rb><rt>りゅう がく</rt></ruby>のチャンスが<ruby><rb>舞</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>込</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>んできた。そのころ<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>将来</rb><rt>しょう らい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>進路</rb><rt>しん ろ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>決</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>められずいろいろ<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>悩</rb><rt>なや</rt></ruby>んでいたところだった。</span>／<span class="translation">I was unexpectedly blessed with the chance to study overseas. At that time in my life, I couldn’t decide on a future direction and was worrying about all sorts of things. </span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses that a certain condition has continued from a previous time to the point in time indicated in the sentence. Often used when explaining one’s thinking or psychological condition, to express that it has changed or a new development has come about.  </div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x54878"><span class="number">d. </span>V-るところだ</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>これから<ruby><rb>家</rb><rt>いえ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>るところですから、30 <ruby><rb>分</rb><rt>ぷん</rt></ruby>ほどしたら<ruby><rb>着</rb><rt>つ</rt></ruby>くと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>います。</span>／<span class="translation">I am just about to leave home, so I should be there in about thirty minutes. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>飛行機</rb><rt>ひ こう き</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>飛</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>び<ruby><rb>立</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>つところだ。</span>／<span class="translation">The plane is just about to take off.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><span class="number">A:</span>ご<ruby><rb>飯</rb><rt>はん</rt></ruby>もう<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べた？</span>／<span class="translation">Have you already had (breakfast/lunch/supper)?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>ううん、これから<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べるところ。</span>／<span class="translation">No, I’m just about to eat. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>家</rb><rt>いえ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>戻</rb><rt>もど</rt></ruby>って<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>ると、<ruby><rb>妻</rb><rt>つま</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>物</rb><rt>もの</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>出掛</rb><rt>で か</rt></ruby>けるところだった。</span>／<span class="translation">When I returned home, my wife was just leaving to go out shopping. </span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses the stage immediately before an action or change takes place. Sometimes used with adverbs like ちょうど (just now), 今 (now), and これから (after this/now).</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x54930"><span class="number">2. </span>Vところだ〈counter-factual〉</h2><div class="explanation">Expresses a situation counter to reality. Means “if things were different, then such-and-such would be the case.” Often preceded by a conditional clause marked with たら, なら, or ば.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x54943"><span class="number">a. </span>...たらVところだ</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>昔</rb><rt>むかし</rt></ruby>だったらそんな<ruby><rb>過激</rb><rt>か げき</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>発言</rb><rt>はつ げん</rt></ruby>をする<ruby><rb>人間</rb><rt>にん げん</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>処刑</rb><rt>しょ けい</rt></ruby>されているところだ。</span>／<span class="translation">If this were still the old days, people who make such radical statements would be executed. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>父</rb><rt>ちち</rt></ruby>がそのことを<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>ったら<ruby><rb>激怒</rb><rt>げき ど</rt></ruby>するところだ。</span>／<span class="translation">If my father found out about that, he would be furious. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>先生</rb><rt>せん せい</rt></ruby>がお<ruby><rb>元気</rb><rt>げん き</rt></ruby>だったら、<ruby><rb>今日</rb><rt>きょう</rt></ruby>のような<ruby><rb>日</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>一緒</rb><rt>いっ しょ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>中華料理</rb><rt>ちゅう か りょう り</rt></ruby>でも<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べているところでしょう。</span>／<span class="translation">If my teacher were still in good health, on a day like today we would be together eating Chinese food or something. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>らせていただかなければ、とっくにあきらめていたところです。</span>／<span class="translation">If you hadn’t let me know, I would already have given up. </span></div><div class="explanation">Placed after the dictionary form or <i>ta</i>-form of a verb and preceded by a conditional clause marked by ...ば, ...たら, etc. Expresses that, although the reality is different, the speaker can imagine a situation that would arise if a certain condition were realized. </div><div class="explanation">For example, (1) means “If this were the old days, we would expect them to be executed,” but this does not happen in present-day society.  </div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x54992"><span class="number">b. </span>...ところだった</h3><h4 class="info">［V-るところだった］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-ていたところだった］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>もし<ruby><rb>気</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>がつくのが<ruby><rb>遅</rb><rt>おそ</rt></ruby>かったら、<ruby><rb>大惨事</rb><rt>だい さん じ</rt></ruby>になるところだった。</span>／<span class="translation">If we had noticed too late, it could have been a real tragedy.  </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>あっ、あなたに<ruby><rb>大事</rb><rt>だい じ</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はなし</rt></ruby>があるのを<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>だ</rt></ruby>しました。うっかり<ruby><rb>忘</rb><rt>わす</rt></ruby>れるところでした。</span>／<span class="translation">Oh, I just remembered that I have something important to discuss with you. I had almost forgotten. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>ありがとうございます。<ruby><rb>注意</rb><rt>ちゅう い</rt></ruby>していただかなければ<ruby><rb>忘</rb><rt>わす</rt></ruby>れていたところでした。</span>／<span class="translation">Thank you so much. If you hadn’t warned me, I would have forgotten. </span></div><div class="explanation">Means that under different circumstances a certain event would have occurred, but it was narrowly avoided, just in time. Often used with conditional clauses marked with ...ば or ...たら. To emphasize that the event was right on the verge of occurring, the expression もうすこしで...ところだった (any longer and...would have...) may be used. </div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x55027"><span class="number">c. </span>...なら（ば）...ところ　だが／を</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>普通</rb><rt>ふ つう</rt></ruby>ならただではすまないところだが、<ruby><rb>今回</rb><rt>こん かい</rt></ruby>だけは<ruby><rb>見逃</rb><rt>み のが</rt></ruby>してやろう。</span>／<span class="translation">Ordinarily I wouldn't let this pass, but I'll overlook it just this once. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>本来</rb><rt>ほん らい</rt></ruby>ならば<ruby><rb>直接</rb><rt>ちょく せつ</rt></ruby>お<ruby><rb>伺</rb><rt>うかが</rt></ruby>いすべきところですが、<ruby><rb>書面</rb><rt>しょ めん</rt></ruby>にて<ruby><rb>失礼</rb><rt>しつ れい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>致</rb><rt>いた</rt></ruby>します。</span>／<span class="translation">I know that under normal circumstances I should come to see you in person, but I hope you don’t mind my sending you a letter instead. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>通常</rb><rt>つう じょう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>定価</rb><rt>てい か</rt></ruby>どおりのところを、お<ruby><rb>得意</rb><rt>とく い</rt></ruby>さんに<ruby><rb>限</rb><rt>かぎ</rt></ruby>り<ruby><rb>特別</rb><rt>とく べつ</rt></ruby>に1<ruby><rb>万円</rb><rt>まん えん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>引</rb><rt>び</rt></ruby>きになっております。</span>／<span class="translation">Although normally we charge the list price, we are offering a special 10,000 yen discount to our best customers only. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>いつもなら1<ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>けるところを、<ruby><rb>今日</rb><rt>きょう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>交通</rb><rt>こう つう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>事故</rb><rt>じ こ</rt></ruby>があって3<ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby>もかかった。</span>／<span class="translation">We can usually get there in an hour, but today there was a car accident, so it took us three hours.  </span></div><div class="explanation">Used with expressions such as 普通 (usually), 通常 (normally), and 本来ならば (under ordinary circumstances). Expresses that the current state of affairs is special and differs from the usual one. </div></body></html>