<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>にほかならない</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0825.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【にひきかえ】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0827.xhtml">【にむかって】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x73880">【にほかならない】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x73882"><span class="number">1. </span>Nにほかならない</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>この<ruby><rb>会</rb><rt>かい</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>成功</rb><rt>せい こう</rt></ruby>のうちに<ruby><rb>終</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>わらせることが<ruby><rb>出来</rb><rt>で き</rt></ruby>ましたのは、<ruby><rb>皆様</rb><rt>みな さま</rt></ruby>がたのご<ruby><rb>協力</rb><rt>きょう りょく</rt></ruby>のたまものに<ruby><rb>他</rb><rt>ほか</rt></ruby>なりません。</span>／<span class="translation">It was entirely your cooperation that has resulted in a successful conclusion to the meeting.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>年</rb><rt>とし</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>取</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>るというのは、すなわち<ruby><rb>経験</rb><rt>けい けん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>積</rb><rt>つ</rt></ruby>むということに<ruby><rb>他</rb><rt>ほか</rt></ruby>ならない。</span>／<span class="translation">Aging is nothing other than collecting more experiences. </span></div><div class="explanation">Used to assert something and expresses the meaning of “there is nothing more than something” or “it is the very something.”</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x73907"><span class="number">2. </span>...にほかならない</h2><h4 class="info">［...から／...ため　にほかならない］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>父</rb><rt>ちち</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>肺</rb><rt>はい</rt></ruby>ガンになったのは、あの<ruby><rb>工場</rb><rt>こう じょう</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>長年</rb><rt>なが ねん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>働</rb><rt>はたら</rt></ruby>いたために<ruby><rb>他</rb><rt>ほか</rt></ruby>ならない。</span>／<span class="translation">My father’s lung cancer is entirely due to the fact that he worked at that factory for many years. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>憎</rb><rt>にく</rt></ruby>むのは、<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>業績</rb><rt>ぎょう せき</rt></ruby>をねたんでいるからに<ruby><rb>他</rb><rt>ほか</rt></ruby>ならない。</span>／<span class="translation">The reason he hates me is entirely because he is jealous of my accomplishments. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>この<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>にこんなにも<ruby><rb>打</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>ち<ruby><rb>込</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>むことができたのは、<ruby><rb>家族</rb><rt>か ぞく</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>支</rb><rt>ささ</rt></ruby>えていてくれたからに<ruby><rb>他</rb><rt>ほか</rt></ruby>ならない。</span>／<span class="translation">I could throw myself into my work only because I was supported by my family. </span></div><div class="explanation">Used to assert that the reason or cause of some event is nothing more than that, or that is the very reason. </div></body></html>