<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>としたら</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0584.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【とされている】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0586.xhtml">【として】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x55477">【としたら】</h1><div class="explanation">Formed by attaching the particle と to したら. Means something like “supposing that is true,” “supposing that such-and-such exists/occurs,” or “based on this fact/the present state of affairs.” Used to establish the conditions for the supposition “if one were to think such-and-such.” Can hardly ever be replaced by たら alone.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x55492"><span class="number">1. </span>...としたら〈not-yet-realized condition〉</h2><h4 class="info">［N／Na　だとしたら］</h4><h4 class="info">［A／V　としたら］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>家</rb><rt>いえ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>建</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>てるとしたら、<ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>きい<ruby><rb>家</rb><rt>いえ</rt></ruby>がいい。</span>／<span class="translation">If you’re going to build a house, a big one is best.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>もし1<ruby><rb>億円</rb><rt>おく えん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>宝</rb><rt>たから</rt></ruby>くじがあたったとしたら、<ruby><rb>家</rb><rt>いえ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>おう。</span>／<span class="translation">If I were to win a hundred million yen in the lottery, I’d buy a house. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>仮</rb><rt>かり</rt></ruby>にあなたが<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>っていることが<ruby><rb>本当</rb><rt>ほん  とう</rt></ruby>だとしたら、<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>嘘</rb><rt>うそ</rt></ruby>をついていることになる。</span>／<span class="translation">Supposing that what you say is true, that would mean he’s lying to me. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>いらっしゃるとしたら<ruby><rb>何時</rb><rt>なん じ</rt></ruby>ごろになりますか。</span>／<span class="translation">If you were to come, what time do you think it might be?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>責任</rb><rt>せき にん</rt></ruby>があるとしたら、<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>ではなくあなたの<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>ほう</rt></ruby>です。</span>／<span class="translation">If someone is responsible for this, it’s not me but you.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “supposing we assume that such-and-such is a fact,” or “in the event that such-and-such occurs or exists.” としたら is followed by an expression of the speaker’s intention, judgment, or evaluation. Sometimes accompanied by 仮に (supposing that.../granting, for the sake of argument, that...) or もし (if/provided that...). としたら can be followed by expressions of intention or evaluation; in such cases, とすると and とすれば are not natural. </div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>宝くじがあたった｛とすると／とすれば｝家を買おう。／{When/If} I’d win the lottery, then I’ll buy a house. </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x55551"><span class="number">2. </span>...としたら〈already-realized condition〉</h2><h4 class="info">［N／Na　（なの）だとしたら］</h4><h4 class="info">［A／V　（の）だとしたら］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>これだけ<ruby><rb>待</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>っても<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>ないのだとしたら、<ruby><rb>今日</rb><rt>きょう</rt></ruby>はもう<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>ないでしょう。</span>／<span class="translation">If she hasn’t come after we’ve waited this long, then she probably isn’t going to come at all today. </span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>はそのことを<ruby><rb>誰</rb><rt>だれ</rt></ruby>にも<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はな</rt></ruby>していません。</span>／<span class="translation">I haven’t said anything about that to anyone.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>あなたが<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はな</rt></ruby>してないのだとしたら、<ruby><rb>一体</rb><rt>いっ たい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>誰</rb><rt>だれ</rt></ruby>がもらしたのだろう。</span>／<span class="translation"> If you haven’t said anything, then who in the world let it slip?</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses a supposition based on the present situation or information received from another person. Means “if we consider a situation/fact like this.” Often used in the form ...のだとしたら. This usage cannot be combined with the expressions 仮に or もし (see above) . </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x55592"><span class="number">3. </span>（そう）だとしたら</h2><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>寝台車</rb><rt>しん だい しゃ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>全</rb><rt>すべ</rt></ruby>て<ruby><rb>満席</rb><rt>まん せき</rt></ruby>だって。</span>／<span class="translation">They say all the sleeper cars are full. </span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>だとしたら、<ruby><rb>普通</rb><rt>ふ つう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>座席</rb><rt>ざ せき</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>座</rb><rt>すわ</rt></ruby>って<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>くしかないわね。</span>／<span class="translation">If that’s so, then we have no other choice but to go and sit in the regular seats.  </span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>会議</rb><rt>かい ぎ</rt></ruby>は1<ruby><rb>時間遅</rb><rt>じ かん おく</rt></ruby>れの<ruby><rb>開始</rb><rt>かい し</rt></ruby>になったそうですよ。</span>／<span class="translation">I heard that the meeting is going to start about an hour late. </span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>そうだとしたら、こんなに<ruby><rb>急</rb><rt>いそ</rt></ruby>いでくるんじゃなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">If that’s true, then we didn't have to hurry as much as we did to get here. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>台風</rb><rt>たい ふう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>上陸</rb><rt>じょう りく</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>満潮</rb><rt>まん ちょう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>時刻</rb><rt>じ こく</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>重</rb><rt>かさ</rt></ruby>なるらしい。だとしたら、<ruby><rb>沿岸</rb><rt>えん がん</rt></ruby>では<ruby><rb>厳重</rb><rt>げん じゅう</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>警戒</rb><rt>けい かい</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>必要</rb><rt>ひつ よう</rt></ruby>になる。</span>／<span class="translation">It looks like the typhoon will hit at the same time as high tide. If that's the case, coastal areas will have to be on close alert.  </span></div><div class="explanation">Refers to the preceding sentence or an utterance made by the addressee and means “if we take that fact/situation into consideration” or “if that is a fact.”</div></body></html>