<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ものだから</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part1000.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ものだ】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part1002.xhtml">【ものではない】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x99258">【ものだから】</h1><h4 class="info">［N／Na　なものだから］</h4><h4 class="info">［Aものだから］</h4><h4 class="info">［Vものだから］</h4><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x99266"><span class="number">1. </span>...ものだから</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>前</rb><rt>まえ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>走</rb><rt>はし</rt></ruby>っている<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>転</rb><rt>ころ</rt></ruby>んだものだから、それにつまづいて<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>もころんでしまった。</span>／<span class="translation">The person running in front of me fell down and so I tripped (on <span class="noSeparate">him/her</span>) and fell, too.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>「<ruby><rb>父</rb><rt>ちち</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>危篤</rb><rt>き とく</rt></ruby>すぐ<ruby><rb>帰</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>れ」という<ruby><rb>電報</rb><rt>でん ぽう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>たものだから、あわてて<ruby><rb>新幹線</rb><rt>しん かん せん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>飛</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>び<ruby><rb>乗</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>って<ruby><rb>帰</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>って<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>た。</span>／<span class="translation">I got a telegram saying, “Father critically ill. Return immediately,” and so I jumped on a <i>shinkansen</i> (bullet train) and came back.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>がこの<ruby><rb>本</rb><rt>ほん</rt></ruby>をあまりに<ruby><rb>薦</rb><rt>すす</rt></ruby>めるものだから、つい<ruby><rb>借</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>りてしまった。</span>／<span class="translation">He recommended this book so much that (against my better judgment) I borrowed it.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>駅</rb><rt>えき</rt></ruby>まであまりに<ruby><rb>遠</rb><rt>とお</rt></ruby>かったものだから、タクシーに<ruby><rb>乗</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>ってしまった。</span>／<span class="translation">It was too far to the station, so I took a taxi.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>昨日</rb><rt>きのう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>練習</rb><rt>れん しゅう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>なかったね。</span>／<span class="translation">You didn’t come to the practice yesterday, eh?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>ええ、<ruby><rb>妹</rb><rt>いもうと</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>熱</rb><rt>ねつ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>だ</rt></ruby>したものですから。</span>／<span class="translation">That’s right, because my little sister had a temperature.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>英語</rb><rt>えい ご</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>苦手</rb><rt>にが て</rt></ruby>なものですから<ruby><rb>外国</rb><rt>がい こく</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>旅行</rb><rt>りょ こう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>尻</rb><rt>しり</rt></ruby>ごみしてしまいます。</span>／<span class="translation">Because I’m bad at English, I’m hesitant to take trips abroad.</span></div><div class="explanation">Shows cause or reason. It can be rephrased as から, but volitional and imperative expressions cannot follow.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>近いものだから、歩こう。／Because it’s close, let’s walk.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>近いから歩こう。／Because it’s close, let’s walk.</div><div class="explanation">Often used to express that the situation is intense or serious and, because of that, something is done. Usually used in speech and becomes もんだから in casual speech.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x99358"><span class="number">2. </span>...おもったものだから</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>はもう<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>っていると<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>ったものだから、<ruby><rb>伝</rb><rt>つた</rt></ruby>えませんでした。</span>／<span class="translation">Because I thought he already knew, I didn’t tell him.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>はたぶんいないと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>ったものですから、<ruby><rb>電話</rb><rt>でん わ</rt></ruby>しませんでした。</span>／<span class="translation">I thought she would probably not be there, and so I didn’t telephone her.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>様子</rb><rt>よう す</rt></ruby>がいつもとは<ruby><rb>違</rb><rt>ちが</rt></ruby>うと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>ったものですから、すぐ<ruby><rb>病院</rb><rt>びょう いん</rt></ruby>へ<ruby><rb>連</rb><rt>つ</rt></ruby>れて<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>きました。</span>／<span class="translation">I thought the child’s appearance was different than normal, so I immediately took her to the hospital.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>雨</rb><rt>あめ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>降</rb><rt>ふ</rt></ruby>るといけないと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>ったものですから、<ruby><rb>洗濯</rb><rt>せん たく</rt></ruby>ものを<ruby><rb>取</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>り<ruby><rb>込</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>んでおきました。</span>／<span class="translation">Thinking it would not be good if it rained, I brought the laundry in.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>手紙</rb><rt>て がみ</rt></ruby>では<ruby><rb>間</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>合</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>わないと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>ったものだから、ファックスにしました。</span>／<span class="translation">I didn’t think a letter would make it on time, so I sent a fax.</span></div><div class="explanation">This is almost the same as 思ったから but has more of a sense of giving an excuse.</div></body></html>