<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>なりと</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0715.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【なり<sub class="variation">3</sub>】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0717.xhtml">【なる】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x66939">【なりと】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x66941"><span class="number">1. </span>Nなりと（も）</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>よろしかったら<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はなし</rt></ruby>なりとも<ruby><rb>聞</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>いて<ruby><rb>下</rb><rt>くだ</rt></ruby>さい。</span>／<span class="translation">If you would, please spare me a few moments and listen to my story.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>ここにおかけになってお<ruby><rb>茶</rb><rt>ちゃ</rt></ruby>なりと<ruby><rb>召</rb><rt>め</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>がっていらして<ruby><rb>下</rb><rt>くだ</rt></ruby>さい。</span>／<span class="translation">Please have a seat here and have some tea or something.</span></div><div class="explanation">Mainly follows a noun and is used to show one of several examples.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x66966"><span class="number">2. </span><ruby><rb>疑</rb><rt>ぎ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>問</rb><rt>もん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>詞</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>（+<ruby><rb>格</rb><rt>かく</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>助</rb><rt>じょ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>詞</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>）+なりと</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>お<ruby><rb>前</rb><rt>まえ</rt></ruby>みたいな<ruby><rb>勝手</rb><rt>かっ て</rt></ruby>なやつはどこへなりと<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ってしまえばいい。</span>／<span class="translation">Someone as self-centered as you should just get lost!</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>だれとなりと、<ruby><rb>好</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>きな<ruby><rb>男</rb><rt>おとこ</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>一緒</rb><rt>いっ しょ</rt></ruby>になるがいい。</span>／<span class="translation">You can marry any kind of man, whomever you like. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>なんなりとお<ruby><rb>好</rb><rt>この</rt></ruby>みのものをお<ruby><rb>持</rb><rt>も</rt></ruby>ちしますのでおっしゃって<ruby><rb>下</rb><rt>くだ</rt></ruby>さい。</span>／<span class="translation">I’ll bring you anything you like, so please let me know your desire.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>ご<ruby><rb>希望</rb><rt>き ぼう</rt></ruby>がありましたら、どうぞ<ruby><rb>遠慮</rb><rt>えん りょ</rt></ruby>せずに<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>なりとお<ruby><rb>申</rb><rt>もう</rt></ruby>しつけ<ruby><rb>下</rb><rt>くだ</rt></ruby>さい。</span>／<span class="translation">If you have any particular preference, please don’t hesitate to tell us.</span></div><div class="explanation">Question word + なりと appears in fixed, idiomatic expressions such as どこへなりと(wherever to), だれとなりと (whoever with) and なんなりと (whatever). Means that someone can choose whatever <span class="noSeparate">s/he</span> likes. </div></body></html>