<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>いまごろ</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0065.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【いない】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0067.xhtml">【いまさら】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x6137">【いまごろ】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x6139"><span class="number">1. </span>いまごろになって</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>注文</rb><rt>ちゅう もん</rt></ruby>していた<ruby><rb>本</rb><rt>ほん</rt></ruby>が、<ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>ごろになってやっと<ruby><rb>届</rb><rt>とど</rt></ruby>いた。</span>／<span class="translation">It’s taken until now for that book I ordered to finally arrive. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>ごろになってチケットを<ruby><rb>予約</rb><rt>よ やく</rt></ruby>しようと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>ってももう<ruby><rb>遅</rb><rt>おそ</rt></ruby>いよ。</span>／<span class="translation">It’s too late to book a ticket now.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “now,” but is used in situations in which the realization of a matter or the performance of an action is too late.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x6164"><span class="number">2. </span>いまごろ　V-ても／V-たところで</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>ごろ<ruby><rb>佐藤</rb><rt>さ とう</rt></ruby>さんに<ruby><rb>電話</rb><rt>でん わ</rt></ruby>しても、もううちを<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>ているのではないだろうか。</span>／<span class="translation">Even if I call Sato-san now, I suppose he’ll have already left home. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>君</rb><rt>きみ</rt></ruby>ねえ、<ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>ごろ<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>ても<ruby><rb>遅</rb><rt>おそ</rt></ruby>いよ。もう<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>はすんでしまったよ。</span>／<span class="translation">It’s too late to come now. The job is already finished.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>ごろがんばってみたところで、もう<ruby><rb>結果</rb><rt>けっ か</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>変</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>わらないだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">However hard you try now, the result will not change.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>ごろ<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ってみたところで、もう<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べ<ruby><rb>物</rb><rt>もの</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>残</rb><rt>のこ</rt></ruby>っていないだろうし、<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>くのはよそう。</span>／<span class="translation">Even if we go now, there probably won’t be any food left or anything, so let’s not go.</span></div><div class="explanation">Like いまごろになって, this means it’s too late or useless to take a particular action at the present time.</div></body></html>