<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>てみせる</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0493.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【てまもなく】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0495.xhtml">【てみる】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x44502">【てみせる】</h1><h4 class="info">［V-てみせる］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>かれは<ruby><rb>柔道</rb><rt>じゅう どう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>型</rb><rt>かた</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>教</rb><rt>おし</rt></ruby>えるためにまずやってみせた。</span>／<span class="translation">To teach the <i>ju</i><i>u</i><i>d</i><i>o</i><i>o</i> form, he first showed how it’s done.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>歌</rb><rt>うた</rt></ruby>がおじょうずだそうですね。<ruby><rb>一度</rb><rt>いち ど</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>歌</rb><rt>うた</rt></ruby>ってみせてください。</span>／<span class="translation">I hear you’re good at singing. Please sing for us once.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>ファックスの<ruby><rb>使</rb><rt>つか</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>かた</rt></ruby>がまだわからないので、<ruby><rb>一度</rb><rt>いち ど</rt></ruby>やって<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>せてくれませんか。</span>／<span class="translation">I don’t know how to use this fax machine yet, so could you please show me once?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>トラクターぐらいなら、<ruby><rb>一度</rb><rt>いち ど</rt></ruby>やってみせてもらったら、<ruby><rb>後</rb><rt>あと</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>一人</rb><rt>ひとり</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>扱</rb><rt>あつか</rt></ruby>えると<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>います。</span>／<span class="translation">I think I could operate a tractor on my own, if someone showed me how to do it once.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses the actual demonstration of an action in order to introduce or promote better understanding of something.</div></body></html>