<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>もしも</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0984.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【もしくは】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0986.xhtml">【もちまして】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x97366">【もしも】</h1><div class="explanation">Used to further express the word もし, this means “supposing such were the case.”</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x97378"><span class="number">1. </span>もしも...たら</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>もしも<ruby><rb>家</rb><rt>いえ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>えるなら、<ruby><rb>海辺</rb><rt>うみ べ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>洋館</rb><rt>よう かん</rt></ruby>がいい。</span>／<span class="translation">If I could buy a house, a western-style one near the beach would be nice.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>もしも<ruby><rb>僕</rb><rt>ぼく</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>君</rb><rt>きみ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>立場</rb><rt>たち ば</rt></ruby>だったら、<ruby><rb>違</rb><rt>ちが</rt></ruby>う<ruby><rb>行動</rb><rt>こう どう</rt></ruby>をとると<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>う。</span>／<span class="translation">If I were in your situation, I think I would behave differently.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>もしも<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>君</rb><rt>きみ</rt></ruby>ぐらい<ruby><rb>若</rb><rt>わか</rt></ruby>ければ<ruby><rb>世界中</rb><rt>せ かい じゅう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>飛</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>びまわっているだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">If I were as young as you, I think I would be travelling extensively around the world.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>もしも<ruby><rb>地震</rb><rt>じ しん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>起</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>こるのがあと30 <ruby><rb>分</rb><rt>ぷん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>遅</rb><rt>おそ</rt></ruby>ければ、<ruby><rb>被害</rb><rt>ひ がい</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>甚大</rb><rt>じん だい</rt></ruby>なものになっていただろう。</span>／<span class="translation">If the earthquake had happened thirty minutes later, the damage would probably have been enormous.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used with conditional expressions such as たら／ば／なら, this expresses the assumption that “if such were the case,” in reference to things which may or may not become reality or which are inconsistent with the facts.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x97415"><span class="number">2. </span>もしものN</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>父</rb><rt>ちち</rt></ruby>にもしものことがあったらどうしよう。</span>／<span class="translation">If something happened to Father, what would we do?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>もしもの<ruby><rb>場合</rb><rt>ば あい</rt></ruby>にはすぐ<ruby><rb>連絡</rb><rt>れん らく</rt></ruby>してください。</span>／<span class="translation">If something should happen, please contact me right away.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>大地震</rb><rt>だい じ しん</rt></ruby>はそんなにちょくちょく<ruby><rb>起</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>こるわけではないが、もしもの<ruby><rb>時</rb><rt>とき</rt></ruby>のために<ruby><rb>準備</rb><rt>じゅん び</rt></ruby>をしておいた<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>ほう</rt></ruby>がよい。</span>／<span class="translation">It’s not that major earthquakes happen so frequently, but it’s better to be prepared for such a time.</span></div><div class="explanation">Nouns such as 時, 場合, こと come after もしも and express the meaning that “if by some chance, such a situation should be the case....” This is used in reference to such things as death, critical conditions, major disasters, and undesirable serious situations. Example (1) is a euphemistic way of talking about death. 万一 carries roughly the same meaning and can be used in this way also. もし cannot be used in this way.</div></body></html>