<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>もっとも</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0990.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【もっと】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0992.xhtml">【もっぱら】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x97817">【もっとも】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x97819"><span class="number">1. </span>もっとも</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>レポートは<ruby><rb>来週</rb><rt>らい しゅう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>提出</rb><rt>てい しゅつ</rt></ruby>して<ruby><rb>下</rb><rt>くだ</rt></ruby>さい。もっとも、はやくできた<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>今日</rb><rt>きょう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>だ</rt></ruby>してもかまいません。</span>／<span class="translation">Please hand in the report by next week. Of course, those who have completed it early may hand it in today.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>この<ruby><rb>事故</rb><rt>じ こ</rt></ruby>では、<ruby><rb>橋本</rb><rt>はし もと</rt></ruby>さんに<ruby><rb>責任</rb><rt>せき にん</rt></ruby>がある。もっとも、<ruby><rb>相手</rb><rt>あい て</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>村田</rb><rt>むら た</rt></ruby>さんにも<ruby><rb>落度</rb><rt>おち ど</rt></ruby>があったことは<ruby><rb>否定</rb><rt>ひ てい</rt></ruby>できない。</span>／<span class="translation">Hashimoto-san is responsible for this accident. Still, it can’t be denied that the other party, Murata-san, also made a mistake.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>強</rb><rt>つよ</rt></ruby>かったなあ。もっとも、<ruby><rb>毎日</rb><rt>まい にち</rt></ruby>あれだけ<ruby><rb>練習</rb><rt>れん しゅう</rt></ruby>しているのだから<ruby><rb>当然</rb><rt>とう ぜん</rt></ruby>か。</span>／<span class="translation">He was so strong. That’s to be expected considering how much he practices every day.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to partially revise the contents of the preceding statement. </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x97850"><span class="number">2. </span>もっとも　...が／...けど</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>あしたから<ruby><rb>旅行</rb><rt>りょ こう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>きます。もっとも<ruby><rb>二</rb><rt>に</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>三日</rb><rt>さん にち</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>旅行</rb><rt>りょ こう</rt></ruby>ですが。</span>／<span class="translation">I am going on a trip from tomorrow. But it’s only for two or three days.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>あのホテルにした<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>ほう</rt></ruby>がいいんじゃない。もっとも、<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ったことがないから、<ruby><rb>本当</rb><rt>ほん  とう</rt></ruby>にいいかどうかわからないけど。</span>／<span class="translation">Wouldn’t it be good to choose that hotel? Although, as I haven’t been there myself, I don’t know for sure if it’s any good.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>がそう<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>っていました。もっともうそか<ruby><rb>本当</rb><rt>ほん  とう</rt></ruby>かは<ruby><rb>分</rb><rt>わ</rt></ruby>からないけど。</span>／<span class="translation">She said so. But whether it’s true or not, I have no idea.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>わたしは<ruby><rb>来年</rb><rt>らい ねん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>東大</rb><rt>とう だい</rt></ruby>へ<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>きます。もっとも<ruby><rb>試験</rb><rt>し けん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>受</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>かればの<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はなし</rt></ruby>ですが。</span>／<span class="translation">Next year I am going to Tokyo University. I mean, that’s if I pass the exam.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>スポーツをするなら、サッカーが<ruby><rb>一番</rb><rt>いち ばん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>面白</rb><rt>おも しろ</rt></ruby>い。もっとも<ruby><rb>疲</rb><rt>つか</rt></ruby>れることは<ruby><rb>疲</rb><rt>つか</rt></ruby>れるけど。</span>／<span class="translation">When it comes to playing sports, football is the most interesting. That isn’t to say that it’s not an exhausting sport.</span></div><div class="explanation">In addition to partially revising the content of the text which has gone before, this is also used to deny assumptions that the listener may have made on the basis of that content. ...けど is used in speech.</div></body></html>