<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>くわえて</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0196.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【くれる】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0198.xhtml">【げ】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x15827">【くわえて】</h1><h4 class="info">［NくわえてN］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>規則正</rb><rt>き そく ただ</rt></ruby>しい<ruby><rb>食事</rb><rt>しょく じ</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>適度</rb><rt>てき ど</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>運動</rb><rt>うん どう</rt></ruby>、くわえて<ruby><rb>近所</rb><rt>きん じょ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>人達</rb><rt>ひと たち</rt></ruby>との<ruby><rb>日常的</rb><rt>にち じょう てき</rt></ruby>なつきあい、そういったものがこの<ruby><rb>村</rb><rt>むら</rt></ruby>のお<ruby><rb>年寄</rb><rt>とし よ</rt></ruby>りの<ruby><rb>長生</rb><rt>なが い</rt></ruby>きの<ruby><rb>秘訣</rb><rt>ひ けつ</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>考</rb><rt>かんが</rt></ruby>えられる。</span>／<span class="translation">It is believed that the secret to the long lives of the elderly in this village lies in such things as regular eating habits and an appropriate amount of exercise, along with daily contact with their neighbors. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>慢性的</rb><rt>まん せい てき</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>不作</rb><rt>ふ さく</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>加</rb><rt>くわ</rt></ruby>えて<ruby><rb>百年</rb><rt>ひゃく ねん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>一度</rb><rt>いち ど</rt></ruby>という<ruby><rb>大災害</rb><rt>だい さい がい</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>食糧</rb><rt>しょく りょう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>不足</rb><rt>ぶ そく</rt></ruby>はいっそう<ruby><rb>深刻</rb><rt>しん こく</rt></ruby>になっている。</span>／<span class="translation">The food shortages have become even more serious due to the chronically poor harvests and, on top of that, a natural disaster such as happens only once every hundred years. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>地場</rb><rt>じば</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>産業</rb><rt>さん ぎょう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>衰退</rb><rt>すい たい</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>加</rb><rt>くわ</rt></ruby>えて<ruby><rb>児童</rb><rt>じ どう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>減少</rb><rt>げん しょう</rt></ruby>による<ruby><rb>小学校</rb><rt>しょう がっ こう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>廃校</rb><rt>はい こう</rt></ruby>が、この<ruby><rb>地域</rb><rt>ち いき</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>人口</rb><rt>じんこう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>流出</rb><rt>りゅうしゅつ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>拍車</rb><rt>はく しゃ</rt></ruby>をかけているようだ。</span>／<span class="translation">The decline in local industries and, in addition, the closing down of elementary schools due to fewer pupils seem to be accelerating the exodus of the population from this region. </span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses that something is added. Means “not only that” or “on top of that.” Tends to be used in written language. In formal written language, くわうるに is also used.</div></body></html>