<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>さらに</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0254.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【さも】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0256.xhtml">【さることながら】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x20036">【さらに】</h1><h4 class="info">［さらにNa／A／V］</h4><h4 class="info">［さらに+数量詞］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>一日一回</rb><rt>いち にち いっ かい</rt></ruby>では<ruby><rb>効</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>かないので、さらに<ruby><rb>薬</rb><rt>くすり</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>量</rb><rt>りょう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>増</rb><rt>ふ</rt></ruby>やした。</span>／<span class="translation">Since one dose per day had no effect, the amount of medicine was further increased. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>このままでも<ruby><rb>十分</rb><rt>じゅう ぶん</rt></ruby>おいしいのだが、クリームを<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>れるとさらにおいしくなる。</span>／<span class="translation">It’s tasty enough as is, but adding cream will make it even more delicious.  </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>さらに<ruby><rb>多</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>くの<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>かた</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>利用</rb><rt>り よう</rt></ruby>していただけますように<ruby><rb>今月</rb><rt>こん げつ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>入会金</rb><rt>にゅう かい きん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>半額</rb><rt>はん がく</rt></ruby>にいたしております。またご<ruby><rb>家族</rb><rt>か ぞく</rt></ruby>でご<ruby><rb>入会</rb><rt>にゅう かい</rt></ruby>いただきますと、さらにお<ruby><rb>得</rb><rt>とく</rt></ruby>なファミリー<ruby><rb>割引</rb><rt>わり びき</rt></ruby>がございます。</span>／<span class="translation">With the hope that even more people will use (our facilities), we have reduced membership fees by half this month. Also, if you join as a family, there is the further advantage of a family discount. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>途中</rb><rt>と ちゅう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>小屋</rb><rt>こ や</rt></ruby>まで5<ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby>、それから<ruby><rb>頂上</rb><rt>ちょう じょう</rt></ruby>まではさらに2<ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby>かかった。</span>／<span class="translation">It took five hours to get to the hut along the way, and after that an additional two hours to the top of the mountain. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>さらに<ruby><rb>二人</rb><rt>ふたり</rt></ruby>のメンバーが<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>はい</rt></ruby>って、<ruby><rb>団員</rb><rt>だん いん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>全部</rb><rt>ぜん ぶ</rt></ruby>で 18 <ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>にん</rt></ruby>になった。</span>／<span class="translation">With two more people joining, the total number of members reached eighteen.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>事故</rb><rt>じ こ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>全貌</rb><rt>ぜん ぼう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>明</rb><rt>あき</rt></ruby>らかになるにしたがって、<ruby><rb>更</rb><rt>さら</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>犠牲者</rb><rt>ぎ せい しゃ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>増</rb><rt>ふ</rt></ruby>える<ruby><rb>見込</rb><rt>み こ</rt></ruby>みである。</span>／<span class="translation">As the full extent of the accident becomes clear, the number of victims is expected to increase further. </span></div><div class="explanation">Used to say that the degree of something will increase further. Has the tone of a written language expression. Also used in polite spoken language. When used with a quantity or amount, it has the meaning of “in addition, on top of.” Can be replaced by もっと, but もっと is used more in spoken language. Cannot be replaced by もっと in cases like (4) or (5), when it is combined with expressions of quantity. </div></body></html>