<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>をふまえ</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part1078.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【をのぞいて】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part1080.xhtml">【をもとに】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x108154">【をふまえ】</h1><h4 class="info">［Nをふまえ（て）V］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>いまの<ruby><rb>山田</rb><rt>やま だ</rt></ruby>さんの<ruby><rb>報告</rb><rt>ほう こく</rt></ruby>をふまえて<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はな</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>合</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>っていただきたいと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>います。</span>／<span class="translation">I’d like to have a discussion based on what Yamada-san has just reported.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>前回</rb><rt>ぜん かい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>議論</rb><rt>ぎ ろん</rt></ruby>をふまえて<ruby><rb>議事</rb><rt>ぎ じ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>進</rb><rt>すす</rt></ruby>めます。</span>／<span class="translation">Proceedings will continue bearing in mind our last discussion.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>そのご<ruby><rb>提案</rb><rt>てい あん</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>現在</rb><rt>げん ざい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>我々</rb><rt>われ われ</rt></ruby>がおかれている<ruby><rb>状況</rb><rt>じょう きょう</rt></ruby>をふまえてなされているのでしょうか。</span>／<span class="translation">That proposal will be implemented on the basis of our current situation.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>今回</rb><rt>こん かい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>最終</rb><rt>さい しゅう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>答申</rb><rt>とう しん</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>昨年</rb><rt>さく ねん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>中間</rb><rt>ちゅう かん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>答申</rb><rt>とう しん</rt></ruby>をふまえ、さまざまな<ruby><rb>角度</rb><rt>かく ど</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>議論</rb><rt>ぎ ろん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>重</rb><rt>かさ</rt></ruby>ねたうえで<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>だ</rt></ruby>されたものだ。</span>／<span class="translation">The final report, based on last year’s mid-year report, will be made public after it has been discussed from a variety of angles.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “taking something as basis of a hypothesis or judgment,” or “after taking it into consideration.” It is a formal, written expression.</div></body></html>