<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>あと2</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0017.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【あと<sub class="variation">1</sub>】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0019.xhtml">【あとから】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x1137">【あと<sub class="variation">2</sub>】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x1140"><span class="number">1. </span>あと</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>料理</rb><rt>りょう り</rt></ruby>はこのくらいあれば<ruby><rb>十分</rb><rt>じゅう ぶん</rt></ruby>ですね。あと、<ruby><rb>飲</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>み<ruby><rb>物</rb><rt>もの</rt></ruby>はこれで<ruby><rb>足</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>りますか。</span>／<span class="translation">This much food will be enough, right? And will these be enough drinks? </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>以上</rb><rt>い じょう</rt></ruby>でだいたい<ruby><rb>分</rb><rt>わ</rt></ruby>かったと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>いますが、あと、<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なに</rt></ruby>か<ruby><rb>質問</rb><rt>しつ もん</rt></ruby>はありませんか。</span>／<span class="translation">I think you have understood more or less everything, but do you have any questions? </span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><span class="number">A:</span>メンバーはこれだけですね。</span>／<span class="translation">These are all the members, right? </span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>あ、あと、もしかしたら<ruby><rb>田中</rb><rt>た なか</rt></ruby>さんも<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>るかもしれないと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>っていました。</span>／<span class="translation">Well, Tanaka-san said he might come, too.</span></div><div class="explanation">あとis placed at the beginning of a sentence or clause. It is used when the speaker remembers something relevant to the matter at hand and adds a piece of information or an after thought.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x1183"><span class="number">2. </span>あと+<ruby><rb>数</rb><rt>すう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>量</rb><rt>りょう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>詞</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby></h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>その<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>片</rb><rt>かた</rt></ruby>づけるにはあと3<ruby><rb>日</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>十分</rb><rt>じゅう ぶん</rt></ruby>です。</span>／<span class="translation">Three more days will be enough to finish that job.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>あと<ruby><rb>二人</rb><rt>ふたり</rt></ruby>そろえば<ruby><rb>野球</rb><rt>や きゅう</rt></ruby>チームが<ruby><rb>作</rb><rt>つく</rt></ruby>れる。</span>／<span class="translation">We can make a baseball team with two more members.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>あと10メートルでゴールインというところで、その<ruby><rb>選手</rb><rt>せん しゅ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>倒</rb><rt>たお</rt></ruby>れてしまった。</span>／<span class="translation">The runner fell down ten meters before the finish line.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>あと<ruby><rb>少</rb><rt>すこ</rt></ruby>しで<ruby><rb>終</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>わりますので、<ruby><rb>待</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>っていただけますか。</span>／<span class="translation">I will finish it in a moment, so could you please wait?</span></div><div class="explanation">In these cases, あとindicates that a certain amount is added to the present number or quantity. It means that, by increasing the quantity by the amount indicated after あと, the conditions would be met for a certain event to take place. In other words, あと indicates the quantity that is needed to fulfill a certain condition, as shown in the following examples.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>卒業式まであと1週間だ。←あと1週間で卒業式だ。／It’s one week until the graduation ceremony. ←The graduation ceremony will be in one week. </div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>ビールはもうあと2本しかない。←あと2本でビールはなくなる。／There are only two bottles of beer left. ←The beer will be gone after just two more bottles.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>サラダがあと少し残っていますが、誰か食べませんか。←あと少しでサラダも終わりです。／There is a little more salad left—would anyone like to have it? ←The salad is nearly gone. </div></body></html>