<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>が1</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0106.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【か】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0108.xhtml">【が<sub class="variation">2</sub>】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x9808">【が<sub class="variation">1</sub>】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x9811"><span class="number">1. </span>Nが</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>あの<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>山本</rb><rt>やま もと</rt></ruby>さんです。</span>／<span class="translation">That person is Yamamoto-san.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>隣</rb><rt>となり</rt></ruby>のうちには<ruby><rb>猫</rb><rt>ねこ</rt></ruby>が3<ruby><rb>匹</rb><rt>びき</rt></ruby>いる。</span>／<span class="translation">There are three cats in the house next door.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>あ、<ruby><rb>財布</rb><rt>さい ふ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>落</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>ちている。</span>／<span class="translation">Look, there’s a wallet on the floor.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>この<ruby><rb>本</rb><rt>ほん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>表紙</rb><rt>ひょう し</rt></ruby>がきれいですね。</span>／<span class="translation">This book has a beautiful cover, doesn’t it.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>はジャズが<ruby><rb>好</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>きです。</span>／<span class="translation">I like jazz.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>外交官</rb><rt>がい こう かん</rt></ruby>になるには<ruby><rb>語学力</rb><rt>ご がく りょく</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>必要</rb><rt>ひつ よう</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">You need to be good at languages to be a diplomat.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（7）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は 10 ヶ<ruby><rb>国語</rb><rt>こく ご</rt></ruby>ができるらしい。</span>／<span class="translation">I heard that he can speak ten different languages.</span></div><div class="explanation">Attaches to a noun and indicates that the noun is the subject of an action or state, as in (1), (2), (3), and (4), or that the noun is the object of a state, as in (5), (6), and (7). When used in proverbs or idioms, it sometimes attaches to words other than nouns, as in 負けるが勝ち (Sometimes you have to lose to win).</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x9866"><span class="number">2. </span>NがNだから</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>親</rb><rt>おや</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>親</rb><rt>おや</rt></ruby>だから、<ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>があんなふうに<ruby><rb>生意気</rb><rt>なま い き</rt></ruby>になるのだ。</span>／<span class="translation">With such parents, it’s no wonder the child is so bratty. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>もう<ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby>だし、<ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ってもあのレストランは<ruby><rb>閉</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>まってるかもしれないよ。</span>／<span class="translation">Considering what time it is now, the restaurant might be closed by the time we get there.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>デパートをぶらぶら<ruby><rb>歩</rb><rt>ある</rt></ruby>いていて、かわいいネックレスを<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>つけた。とても<ruby><rb>気</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ったのだが、なにしろ<ruby><rb>値段</rb><rt>ね だん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>値段</rb><rt>ね だん</rt></ruby>だったので<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>うのはあきらめた。</span>／<span class="translation">I was wandering around the department store and found a pretty necklace. I really liked it, but with the price being what it was, I decided not to buy it.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>再就職</rb><rt>さい しゅう しょく</rt></ruby>しようと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>ったけど、なかなかむずかしいわ。</span>／<span class="translation">I thought I’d try to go back to work, but it’s really quite difficult to find a job.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>そりゃ、<ruby><rb>年</rb><rt>とし</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>年</rb><rt>とし</rt></ruby>だもの。70すぎた<ruby><rb>人間</rb><rt>にん げん</rt></ruby>なんか<ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>どきどこも<ruby><rb>雇</rb><rt>やと</rt></ruby>ってくれないわよ。</span>／<span class="translation">Well, it’s your age. These days no one wants to hire someone in his seventies.</span></div><div class="explanation">The same noun is repeated and then followed by a word expressing a reason, such as だから, ので, し, だもの, or もので. In many cases, this pattern expresses a negative evaluation of the noun and is used to describe an inevitable result that arises from it. For example, (1) means the parents are too indulgent of their children, (2) means it is too late to go to the restaurant, (3) means the price is far too expensive, and (4) means that, in B’s opinion, A is too old to get another job.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x9915"><span class="number">3. </span>NがNだけに</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>ここの<ruby><rb>料理</rb><rt>りょう り</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>素材</rb><rt>そ ざい</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>素材</rb><rt>そ ざい</rt></ruby>だけに<ruby><rb>味</rb><rt>あじ</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>格別</rb><rt>かく べつ</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">The food here is exceptionally tasty because of the ingredients.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>この<ruby><rb>店</rb><rt>みせ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>味</rb><rt>あじ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>たい</rt></ruby>したことはないが、<ruby><rb>場所</rb><rt>ば しょ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>場所</rb><rt>ば しょ</rt></ruby>だけにたいていいつも<ruby><rb>満員</rb><rt>まん いん</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">The food at this restaurant isn’t particularly good, but its location means it’s almost always full.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>この<ruby><rb>店</rb><rt>みせ</rt></ruby>はとても<ruby><rb>気</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>っているのだが、<ruby><rb>場所</rb><rt>ば しょ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>場所</rb><rt>ば しょ</rt></ruby>だけにそうしょっちゅうは<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>られないのが<ruby><rb>残念</rb><rt>ざん ねん</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">I really like this shop, but because it’s located where it is, unfortunately I can’t come very often.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>その<ruby><rb>映画</rb><rt>えい が</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>戦時中</rb><rt>せん じ ちゅう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>日本軍</rb><rt>に ほん ぐん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>侵略</rb><rt>しん りゃく</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>扱</rb><rt>あつか</rt></ruby>ったもので、<ruby><rb>多</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>くの<ruby><rb>評論家</rb><rt>ひょう ろん か</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>絶賛</rb><rt>ぜっ さん</rt></ruby>している<ruby><rb>優</rb><rt>すぐ</rt></ruby>れた<ruby><rb>作品</rb><rt>さく ひん</rt></ruby>だが、<ruby><rb>内容</rb><rt>ない よう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>内容</rb><rt>ない よう</rt></ruby>だけに、<ruby><rb>一般的</rb><rt>いっ ぱん てき</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>娯楽</rb><rt>ご らく</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>映画</rb><rt>えい が</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>比</rb><rt>くら</rt></ruby>べると<ruby><rb>興行</rb><rt>こう ぎょう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>成績</rb><rt>せい せき</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>格段</rb><rt>かく だん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>悪</rb><rt>わる</rt></ruby>かった。</span>／<span class="translation">The movie deals with the aggression of the Japanese army during the war. It is an excellent work that many critics have praised highly, but because of the subject matter, box office returns were markedly worse than those of ordinary movies made for entertainment.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>学長</rb><rt>がく ちょう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>収賄</rb><rt>しゅうわい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>容疑</rb><rt>よう ぎ</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>逮捕</rb><rt>たい ほ</rt></ruby>された。<ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>までも<ruby><rb>小</rb><rt>ちい</rt></ruby>さな<ruby><rb>不祥事</rb><rt>ふ しょう じ</rt></ruby>はあったが、マスコミには<ruby><rb>騒</rb><rt>さわ</rt></ruby>がれないよう<ruby><rb>注意</rb><rt>ちゅう い</rt></ruby>してきた。しかし、<ruby><rb>今回</rb><rt>こん かい</rt></ruby>はことがことだけに、マスコミの<ruby><rb>取材</rb><rt>しゅ ざい</rt></ruby>からは<ruby><rb>逃</rb><rt>のが</rt></ruby>れられないだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">The president of the university was arrested on suspicion of bribery. There have been minor scandals before, but care was always taken to keep the media from making anything of them.  However, this time, with the situation being what it is, there will be no stopping the mass media from covering the story.</span></div><div class="explanation">Repetition of the same noun indicates that a certain outcome is natural or inevitable, considering the characteristics of that noun. NがNだけに is followed by a description of the natural or inevitable outcome. The listener/reader does not know the exact nature of the noun’s characteristics until <span class="noSeparate">s/he</span> reaches the description in the latter part of the sentence. For example, in (1), the description 味も格別だ (exceptionally tasty) tells us the ingredients are good. However, in the sentence 素材が素材だけに大した料理はできやしない (Because the ingredients are what they are, the food can’t be very good), the interpretation is that the ingredients are bad. (2) means a place that is conveniently located and easy to get to. On the other hand, (3) means a place that is inconveniently located and hard to get to. ことがことだけに in (5) is an idiomatic expression. In this example, it means “because this situation is serious.”</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x9958"><span class="number">4. </span>NがNなら...（が）</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>時代</rb><rt>じ だい</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>時代</rb><rt>じ だい</rt></ruby>なら、この<ruby><rb>本</rb><rt>ほん</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>売</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>れたかもしれないが、<ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>時代</rb><rt>じ だい</rt></ruby>では<ruby><rb>人間</rb><rt>にん げん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>生</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>かた</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>問</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>うような<ruby><rb>本</rb><rt>ほん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>若</rb><rt>わか</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>読</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>まれない。</span>／<span class="translation">If times were different, this book might have sold well, but in this day and age, young people don’t read books that raise questions about how to live.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>世</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>世</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>ならあいつも<ruby><rb>出世</rb><rt>しゅっ せ</rt></ruby>できただろうに。</span>／<span class="translation">In another time and place, she probably would have been successful.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>俺</rb><rt>おれ</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>大学</rb><rt>だい がく</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>大学</rb><rt>だい がく</rt></ruby>ならもう<ruby><rb>少</rb><rt>すこ</rt></ruby>しましな<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>にもつけたのだろうが、この<ruby><rb>大学</rb><rt>だい がく</rt></ruby>ではせいぜいこの<ruby><rb>会社</rb><rt>かい しゃ</rt></ruby>ぐらいがいいところだ。</span>／<span class="translation">I suppose if I had graduated from a better university, I could have found a better job, but this is the best company anyone from a university like mine could hope to work for.</span></div><div class="explanation">Repetition of the same noun indicates that the speaker is making the supposition “if the conditions were suitable....” NがNなら is accompanied by expressions such asだろうが, だろうに or かもしれないが, and a statement or description of the actual state of affairs then follows. (1) means “if it were a time when many people thought seriously about how to live,” (2) means “if people in society evaluated him correctly,” and (3) means “if I had graduated from a better university.” This pattern is used to hypothesize a situation that is better than reality; it means “if the situation were X, a good result like Y would follow.” Because the situation hypothesized is one that is actually impossible, a sense of pity, regret, or resignation is implied.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x9989"><span class="number">5. </span>NがNならNもNだ</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>この<ruby><rb>生徒</rb><rt>せい と</rt></ruby>はいつも<ruby><rb>教師</rb><rt>きょう し</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>口答</rb><rt>くち ごた</rt></ruby>えばかりして<ruby><rb>困</rb><rt>こま</rt></ruby>る。<ruby><rb>親</rb><rt>おや</rt></ruby>もすぐ<ruby><rb>学校</rb><rt>がっ こう</rt></ruby>にどなりこんでくるし、まったく、<ruby><rb>親</rb><rt>おや</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>親</rb><rt>おや</rt></ruby>なら<ruby><rb>子</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>子</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">This student always causes trouble to his teachers by answering back. His parents often come storming into the school with complaints, too. With such parents, it’s no wonder the children behave the way they do.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>まったく、おじさんがおじさんなら、おばさんもおばさんだよ。おじさんが<ruby><rb>頑固</rb><rt>がん こ</rt></ruby>なのはわかっているんだから、<ruby><rb>嘘</rb><rt>うそ</rt></ruby>でも「ごめんなさい」って<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>えば<ruby><rb>喧嘩</rb><rt>けん か</rt></ruby>なんかすぐにおさまるのに。</span>／<span class="translation">(to an aunt and uncle) Honestly, you two are both just as bad as each other. (to the aunt) You know he’s obstinate, so if you say “I’m sorry,” even if you don’t mean it, the quarrel will quickly be resolved.</span></div><div class="explanation">The first noun (repeated in NがNなら) is different from the second noun (repeated in NもNだ), but the two nouns are related. The expression as a whole conveys a negative evaluation: both N’s are equally bad. (1) means that the parents and child are equally problematic, and (2) means that both the uncle and aunt are bad, because they are equally stubborn. Used to criticize both parties or elements.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x10014"><span class="number">6. </span>V-たがさいご<span class="reference">→<a href="part0121.xhtml#idtitlex1x11132">【がさいご】</a></span></h2><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x10021"><span class="number">7. </span>V-るがはやいか<span class="reference">→<a href="part0895.xhtml#idtitlex1x83227">【はやいか】</a></span></h2></body></html>