<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ほどなく</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0932.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ほど】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0934.xhtml">【ほとんど】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x88068">【ほどなく】</h1><h4 class="info">［V-てほどなく］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-るとほどなく］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>祖父</rb><rt>そ ふ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>亡</rb><rt>な</rt></ruby>くなってほどなく<ruby><rb>祖母</rb><rt>そ ぼ</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>亡</rb><rt>な</rt></ruby>くなった。</span>／<span class="translation">Soon after my grandfather died, my grandmother died, too.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>広島</rb><rt>ひろ しま</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>長崎</rb><rt>なが さき</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>原爆</rb><rt>げん ばく</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>落</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>とされてほどなく、<ruby><rb>第二次</rb><rt>だい に じ せ かい たい せん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>世界</rb><rt>せ かい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>大戦</rb><rt>たいせん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>終結</rb><rt>しゅう けつ</rt></ruby>した。</span>／<span class="translation">Shortly after the atomic bombs were dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki, World War II concluded.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>新</rb><rt>あたら</rt></ruby>しい<ruby><rb>社長</rb><rt>しゃ ちょう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>就任</rb><rt>しゅう にん</rt></ruby>すると、ほどなく<ruby><rb>社内</rb><rt>しゃ ない</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>経営側</rb><rt>けい えい がわ</rt></ruby>への<ruby><rb>非難</rb><rt>ひ なん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>始</rb><rt>はじ</rt></ruby>まった。</span>／<span class="translation">Shortly after the new company president assumed her position, criticism of the management started in the office.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>Z<ruby><rb>社</rb><rt>しゃ</rt></ruby>がパソコンを<ruby><rb>大幅</rb><rt>おお はば</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>値下</rb><rt>ね さ</rt></ruby>げすると、ほどなく<ruby><rb>他社</rb><rt>た しゃ</rt></ruby>もそれに<ruby><rb>追随</rb><rt>つい ずい</rt></ruby>して<ruby><rb>値下</rb><rt>ね さ</rt></ruby>げを<ruby><rb>始</rb><rt>はじ</rt></ruby>めた。</span>／<span class="translation">When Company Z dramatically cut the price of their PCs, other companies immediately began to follow suit.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “shortly afterwards, soon, before too long.” It is used to describe a past event. It is a formal expression often used in written language. ほどなくして may be used in the place of ほどなく.</div></body></html>