<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>つきましては</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0426.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ついに】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0428.xhtml">【っきり】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x36985">【つきましては】</h1><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>《<ruby><rb>招待状</rb><rt>しょう たい じょう</rt></ruby>》この<ruby><rb>度</rb><rt>たび</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>新</rb><rt>しん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>学生</rb><rt>がく せい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>会館</rb><rt>かいかん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>完成</rb><rt>かん せい</rt></ruby>いたしました。つきましては、<ruby><rb>次</rb><rt>つぎ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>通</rb><rt>とお</rt></ruby>り<ruby><rb>落成式</rb><rt>らく せい しき</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>挙行</rb><rt>きょ こう</rt></ruby>いたしますので、ご<ruby><rb>案内</rb><rt>あん ない</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>申</rb><rt>もう</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>げます。</span>／<span class="translation">《an invitation card》 We are pleased to announce the completion of the new student hall. Please see the following details for the dedication ceremony to mark this occasion.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>先月</rb><rt>せん げつ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>台風</rb><rt>たい ふう</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>当地</rb><rt>とう ち</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>きな<ruby><rb>被害</rb><rt>ひ がい</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>受</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>けました。つきましては<ruby><rb>皆様</rb><rt>みな さま</rt></ruby>にご<ruby><rb>支援</rb><rt>し えん</rt></ruby>いただきたくお<ruby><rb>願</rb><rt>ねが</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>致</rb><rt>いた</rt></ruby>します。</span>／<span class="translation">Last month’s typhoon caused serious damage to this area. Therefore we would like to request your kind support (for reconstruction).</span></div><div class="explanation">A polite form of ついては. Often used in formal letters.</div><h4 class="reference">→<a href="part0425.xhtml#idtitlex1x36806">【ついては】</a></h4></body></html>