<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>がかり</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0111.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【かえる】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0113.xhtml">【がかる】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x10391">【がかり】</h1><div class="explanation">がかり is a word derived from the verb かかる. かかる may mean “take,” as in時間／お金がかかる (take time/money), “see/receive treatment,” as in 医者にかかる (see a doctor), “be affected,” as in 雨がかかる (get wet in the rain), “start,” as in仕事にかかる (get started with work), and so on. </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x10403"><span class="number">1. </span><ruby><rb>数</rb><rt>すう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>量</rb><rt>りょう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>詞</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>+がかり</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>グランドピアノを5<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>にん</rt></ruby>がかりでやっと<ruby><rb>運</rb><rt>はこ</rt></ruby>んだ。</span>／<span class="translation">It took five people to move the grand piano. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>3<ruby><rb>日</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>がかりで<ruby><rb>作</rb><rt>つく</rt></ruby>り<ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>げた<ruby><rb>巨大</rb><rt>きょ だい</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>雪</rb><rt>ゆき</rt></ruby>だるまは、<ruby><rb>翌日</rb><rt>よく じつ</rt></ruby>のポカポカ<ruby><rb>陽気</rb><rt>よう き</rt></ruby>ですぐに<ruby><rb>溶</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>けてしまった。</span>／<span class="translation">The enormous snowman it had taken us three days to build melted away quickly in the warm sunshine of the following day.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>5<ruby><rb>年</rb><rt>ねん</rt></ruby>がかりの<ruby><rb>調査</rb><rt>ちょう さ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>結果</rb><rt>けっ か</rt></ruby>、その<ruby><rb>湖</rb><rt>みずうみ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>生態系</rb><rt>せい たい けい</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>壊</rb><rt>こわ</rt></ruby>れかかっているということがわかった。</span>／<span class="translation">As a result of five long years of research, we found that the ecosystem of the lake was breaking down. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>さすが<ruby><rb>横綱</rb><rt>よこ づな</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>体</rb><rt>からだ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>きくて<ruby><rb>力</rb><rt>ちから</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>強</rb><rt>つよ</rt></ruby>いので、<ruby><rb>高校生</rb><rt>こう こう せい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>力士</rb><rt>りき し</rt></ruby>が3<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>にん</rt></ruby>がかりで<ruby><rb>向</rb><rt>む</rt></ruby>かっていってもまるで<ruby><rb>勝</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>ち<ruby><rb>目</rb><rt>め</rt></ruby>はなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">The <i>yokozuna</i> (grand champion) was as big and strong as you might expect, so there was no chance for a win by any of the three high school wrestlers who faced off against him.</span></div><div class="explanation">Attaches to words like 人, 日, or 時間 and expresses an action that requires many people or a lengthy time to be accomplished. Followed by an expression of the action that was difficult and required such effort.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x10443"><span class="number">2. </span>Nがかり</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>は 30 <ruby><rb>才</rb><rt>さい</rt></ruby>にもなって、<ruby><rb>親</rb><rt>おや</rt></ruby>がかりで<ruby><rb>留学</rb><rt>りゅう がく</rt></ruby>した。</span>／<span class="translation">She studied abroad totally financed by her parents, even though she was already thirty years old.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>男</rb><rt>おとこ</rt></ruby>は「<ruby><rb>君</rb><rt>きみ</rt></ruby>はバラのように<ruby><rb>美</rb><rt>うつく</rt></ruby>しいね」などと、<ruby><rb>芝居</rb><rt>しば い</rt></ruby>がかりのせりふを<ruby><rb>吐</rb><rt>は</rt></ruby>いた。</span>／<span class="translation">The man melodramatically spewed out lines like “You are as beautiful as a rose.”</span></div><div class="explanation">Means something like “depending on/being served by (one’s parents),” as in (1), or “has the quality of (a theatrical performance),” as in (2). There are no other examples but 親がかり for the first type of usage. For the second type, 神がかり (possessed; fanatic) is also used, but there are very few other nouns to which がかり can be attached. The second type is also used in the forms Nがかっている and Nがかった; in such cases, a wider range of words is used, like 青みがかった (with blue overtones) and 左がかった (left-leaning).</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x10467"><span class="number">3. </span>R-がかり</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>広場</rb><rt>ひろ ば</rt></ruby>でトランペットの<ruby><rb>練習</rb><rt>れん しゅう</rt></ruby>をしていると、<ruby><rb>通</rb><rt>とお</rt></ruby>りがかりの<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>何人</rb><rt>なん にん</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>足</rb><rt>あし</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>止</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>めて<ruby><rb>聞</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>いていった。</span>／<span class="translation">When I was practicing my trumpet in a public square, a number of passersby stopped to listen.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>それは<ruby><rb>他</rb><rt>ほか</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>部署</rb><rt>ぶ しょ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>企画</rb><rt>き かく</rt></ruby>だったが、<ruby><rb>担当者</rb><rt>たん とう しゃ</rt></ruby>にいくらかアドバイスもしたので、<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>きがかり<ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>じょう</rt></ruby>しかたなく<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>関</rb><rt>かか</rt></ruby>わることになってしまった。</span>／<span class="translation">Though it was another department’s project, since I had given some advice to the person in charge, I ended up getting involved with it myself.</span></div><div class="explanation">Example (1) means “happened to pass by.” 行きがかり上 in (2) means “because of the sequence of events or situation up to this time.” (1) and (2) are idiomatic expressions, and がかり cannot be attached to any other verbs.</div></body></html>