<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>にいたる</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0745.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【にあって】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0747.xhtml">【にいわせれば】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x69798">【にいたる】</h1><div class="explanation">にいたる is a formal, written expression.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x69810"><span class="number">1. </span>...にいたる</h2><h4 class="info">［N／V　にいたる］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>この<ruby><rb>川</rb><rt>かわ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>大草原</rb><rt>だい そう げん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>横切</rb><rt>よこ ぎ</rt></ruby>って<ruby><rb>流</rb><rt>なが</rt></ruby>れ、やがては<ruby><rb>海</rb><rt>うみ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>至</rb><rt>いた</rt></ruby>る。</span>／<span class="translation">This river runs across a vast grassland and eventually flows into the ocean.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>はトントン<ruby><rb>拍子</rb><rt>びょう し</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>出世</rb><rt>しゅっ せ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>続</rb><rt>つづ</rt></ruby>け、やがて<ruby><rb>大蔵</rb><rt>おおくら</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>大臣</rb><rt>だい じん</rt></ruby>になるに<ruby><rb>至</rb><rt>いた</rt></ruby>る。</span>／<span class="translation">His career advanced rapidly and he ultimately became the Minister of Finance.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>辞</rb><rt>や</rt></ruby>めて<ruby><rb>留学</rb><rt>りゅう がく</rt></ruby>するに<ruby><rb>至</rb><rt>いた</rt></ruby>った<ruby><rb>動機</rb><rt>どう き</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>人生</rb><rt>じん せい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>目標</rb><rt>もく ひょう</rt></ruby>というものを<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>つめなおしてみたいと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>ったことであった。</span>／<span class="translation">The motivation behind why I quit the job and went abroad to study was that I wanted to reconsider my goals in life again.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>さんざん<ruby><rb>悩</rb><rt>なや</rt></ruby>んだ<ruby><rb>結果</rb><rt>けっ か</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>辞</rb><rt>や</rt></ruby>めて<ruby><rb>田舎</rb><rt>いなか</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>自給自足</rb><rt>じ きゅう じ そく</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>生活</rb><rt>せい かつ</rt></ruby>をするという<ruby><rb>結論</rb><rt>けつ ろん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>至</rb><rt>いた</rt></ruby>った。</span>／<span class="translation">The end result of all my worrying was a decision to quit my job and lead a self-sufficient life in the country.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses the meaning “to reach, to lead to.” Can be a spatial meaning such as reaching a certain place, as shown in (1), or can be an abstract meaning such as reaching some stage or conclusion as a result of some change of thing/state/even or thought. にいたる is a formal, written expression.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x69849"><span class="number">2. </span>Nにいたるまで</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>旅行中</rb><rt>りょ こう ちゅう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>ったものからハンドバッグの<ruby><rb>中身</rb><rt>なか み</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>至</rb><rt>いた</rt></ruby>るまで、<ruby><rb>厳</rb><rt>きび</rt></ruby>しく<ruby><rb>調</rb><rt>しら</rt></ruby>べられた。</span>／<span class="translation">Everything―from what I had bought during the trip to the contents of my handbag―was intently examined.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>部長</rb><rt>ぶ ちょう</rt></ruby>クラスから<ruby><rb>新入社員</rb><rt>しん にゅう しゃ いん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>至</rb><rt>いた</rt></ruby>るまで、すべての<ruby><rb>社員</rb><rt>しゃ いん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>特別</rb><rt>とく べつ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>手当</rb><rt>て あて</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>支給</rb><rt>し きゅう</rt></ruby>された。</span>／<span class="translation">A special remuneration was paid to all—from the department heads on down to the new employees.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>テレビの<ruby><rb>普及</rb><rt>ふ きゅう</rt></ruby>によって、<ruby><rb>東京</rb><rt>とう きょう</rt></ruby>などの<ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>だい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>都市</rb><rt>と し</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>地方</rb><rt>ち ほう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>村々</rb><rt>むら むら</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>至</rb><rt>いた</rt></ruby>るまで、ほぼ<ruby><rb>同</rb><rt>おな</rt></ruby>じような<ruby><rb>情報</rb><rt>じょう ほう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>渡</rb><rt>わた</rt></ruby>るようになった。</span>／<span class="translation">With the spread of television, essentially the same information has come to be sent everywhere, from large cities like Tokyo to rural villages.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses almost the same meaning as Nまで. However, Nにいたるまで is used to mention things/states/events in great detail. This expression is often used with ...から．</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x69880"><span class="number">3. </span>...にいたって</h2><h4 class="info">［N／V　にいたって］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>編集</rb><rt>へん しゅう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>段階</rb><rt>だん かい</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>至</rb><rt>いた</rt></ruby>って、<ruby><rb>初</rb><rt>はじ</rt></ruby>めて<ruby><rb>撮影</rb><rt>さつ えい</rt></ruby>したビデオの<ruby><rb>映像</rb><rt>えい ぞう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>使</rb><rt>つか</rt></ruby>いものにならないことがわかったが、すでに<ruby><rb>遅</rb><rt>おそ</rt></ruby>かった。</span>／<span class="translation">Not until we got to the editing stage did we first realize that the video we’d shot was useless, but then it was already too late.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>上司</rb><rt>じょう し</rt></ruby>にはっきり<ruby><rb>注意</rb><rt>ちゅう い</rt></ruby>されるに<ruby><rb>至</rb><rt>いた</rt></ruby>って、ようやく<ruby><rb>自分</rb><rt>じ ぶん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>言葉遣</rb><rt>こと ば づか</rt></ruby>いに<ruby><rb>問題</rb><rt>もん だい</rt></ruby>があることに<ruby><rb>気</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>づいた。</span>／<span class="translation">It was not until my boss warned me explicitly that I realized that I had a problem with my way of speaking.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>卒業</rb><rt>そつ ぎょう</rt></ruby>するに<ruby><rb>至</rb><rt>いた</rt></ruby>って、やっと<ruby><rb>大学</rb><rt>だい がく</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>はい</rt></ruby>った<ruby><rb>目的</rb><rt>もく てき</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>少</rb><rt>すこ</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>えてきたような<ruby><rb>気</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>がする。</span>／<span class="translation">When I was about to graduate, I felt I finally could see something of the goals I had in entering a university.</span></div><div class="explanation">N/Vにいたって expresses the meaning “only when it comes to some extreme stage indicated by N/V.” This expression is often followed by words such as ようやく, やっと and 初めて.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x69913"><span class="number">4. </span>Nにいたっては</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>父</rb><rt>ちち</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>母</rb><rt>はは</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>転職</rb><rt>てん しょく</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>大反対</rb><rt>だい はん たい</rt></ruby>し、<ruby><rb>姉</rb><rt>あね</rt></ruby>にいたっては、そんなことより<ruby><rb>早</rb><rt>はや</rt></ruby>く<ruby><rb>結婚</rb><rt>けっ こん</rt></ruby>しろと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>だ</rt></ruby>す<ruby><rb>始末</rb><rt>し まつ</rt></ruby>だった。</span>／<span class="translation">Both my father and mother are totally against my changing jobs, and what’s more, my elder sister finally ended up saying that it was more important for me to get married quickly. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>首相</rb><rt>しゅ しょう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>代</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>わってからというもの、<ruby><rb>住宅</rb><rt>じゅう たく</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>問題</rb><rt>もん だい</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>教育</rb><rt>きょう いく</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>問題</rb><rt>もん だい</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>手付</rb><rt>て つ</rt></ruby>かずで、<ruby><rb>軍事面</rb><rt>ぐん じ めん</rt></ruby>にいたっては<ruby><rb>予算</rb><rt>よ さん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>増加</rb><rt>ぞう か</rt></ruby>する<ruby><rb>一方</rb><rt>いっ ぽう</rt></ruby>である。</span>／<span class="translation">After the prime minister was replaced, housing and educational problems have not been touched on, and to boot, the budget for military affairs keeps increasing.  </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>不登校</rb><rt>ふ とう こう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>生徒</rb><rt>せい と</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>対</rb><rt>たい</rt></ruby>して、どの<ruby><rb>教師</rb><rt>きょう し</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>対応</rb><rt>たい おう</rt></ruby>もしようとせず、<ruby><rb>教頭</rb><rt>きょう とう</rt></ruby>にいたってはどこかよその<ruby><rb>学校</rb><rt>がっ こう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>転校</rb><rt>てん こう</rt></ruby>してもらえたらなどと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>う<ruby><rb>始末</rb><rt>し まつ</rt></ruby>である。</span>／<span class="translation">No teachers try to deal with truants at all, and even worse is the vice-principal, who ends up saying that she hopes they will transfer to another school somewhere else.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>ことここにいたっては、<ruby><rb>家庭</rb><rt>か てい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>裁判所</rb><rt>さいばんしょ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>仲裁</rb><rt>ちゅう さい</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>頼</rb><rt>たの</rt></ruby>むしかないのではないだろうか。</span>／<span class="translation">Since the problem has come to this stage, there isn’t anything else to do but ask a family court to mediate, right?</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to mention the most extreme case among some negative things/states/events. ことここにいたっては as in (4) is an idiomatic expression that means “when the problem becomes as serious as this.”</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x69950"><span class="number">5. </span>...にいたっても</h2><h4 class="info">［N／V　にいたっても］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>投票率</rb><rt>とう ひょう りつ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>史上</rb><rt>し じょう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>最低</rb><rt>さい てい</rt></ruby>という<ruby><rb>事態</rb><rt>じ たい</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>至</rb><rt>いた</rt></ruby>っても、なお<ruby><rb>自分</rb><rt>じ ぶん</rt></ruby>たちが<ruby><rb>国民</rb><rt>こく みん</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>信頼</rb><rt>しん らい</rt></ruby>されていると<ruby><rb>信</rb><rt>しん</rt></ruby>じて<ruby><rb>疑</rb><rt>うたが</rt></ruby>わない<ruby><rb>政治家</rb><rt>せい じ か</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>少</rb><rt>すく</rt></ruby>なくない。</span>／<span class="translation">Quite a few politicians are convinced that people still trust them, even if the voting percentages for them are the lowest in history. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>大学</rb><rt>だい がく</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>卒業</rb><rt>そつ ぎょう</rt></ruby>するに<ruby><rb>至</rb><rt>いた</rt></ruby>っても、まだ<ruby><rb>自分</rb><rt>じ ぶん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>将来</rb><rt>しょう らい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>目的</rb><rt>もく てき</rt></ruby>があやふやな<ruby><rb>若者</rb><rt>わか もの</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>大勢</rb><rt>おお ぜい</rt></ruby>いる。</span>／<span class="translation">Even when they are about to graduate from university, there are many young people whose future goals are still hazy. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>高校</rb><rt>こう こう</rt></ruby>での<ruby><rb>成績</rb><rt>せい せき</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>下</rb><rt>した</rt></ruby>から10<ruby><rb>番</rb><rt>ばん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>以内</rb><rt>い ない</rt></ruby>にまで<ruby><rb>下</rb><rt>さ</rt></ruby>がるに<ruby><rb>至</rb><rt>いた</rt></ruby>っても、<ruby><rb>両親</rb><rt>りょう しん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>僕</rb><rt>ぼく</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>東京大学</rb><rt>とう きょう だい がく</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>受験</rb><rt>じゅ けん</rt></ruby>させたがった。</span>／<span class="translation">Even when my grades in high school dropped to among the worst ten, my parents wanted me to take the entrance exam for Tokyo University. </span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses the meaning “even when it reaches some extreme stage.” Often followed by words like まだ, なお or いまだに.</div></body></html>