<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>とはいえ</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0615.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【とはいうものの】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0617.xhtml">【とはいっても】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x58493">【とはいえ】</h1><div class="explanation">とはいえ follows a clause or a sentence and means “that is true, but....” Used when the actual result contradicts what is expected from the previous clause/sentence. A formal expression used mainly in written Japanese. とはいいながら, とはいうものの and と(は)いっても may be used instead of とはいえ.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x58505"><span class="number">1. </span>...とはいえ</h2><h4 class="info">［N／Na　（だ）とはいえ］</h4><h4 class="info">［A／V　とはいえ］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>男女</rb><rt>だん じょ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>平等</rb><rt>びょう どう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>世</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>中</rb><rt>なか</rt></ruby>とはいえ、<ruby><rb>職場</rb><rt>しょく ば</rt></ruby>での<ruby><rb>地位</rb><rt>ち い</rt></ruby>や<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>内容</rb><rt>ない よう</rt></ruby>などの<ruby><rb>点</rb><rt>てん</rt></ruby>でまだ<ruby><rb>差別</rb><rt>さ べつ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>残</rb><rt>のこ</rt></ruby>っている。</span>／<span class="translation">Despite the so-called equality of the sexes in today’s world, there is still discrimination in the workplace with respect to things like status and job content.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>国際化</rb><rt>こく さい か</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>進</rb><rt>すす</rt></ruby>んだとはいえ、やはり<ruby><rb>日本</rb><rt>に ほん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>社会</rb><rt>しゃ かい</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>外国人</rb><rt>がい こく じん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>特別視</rb><rt>とく べつ し</rt></ruby>するという<ruby><rb>態度</rb><rt>たい ど</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>残</rb><rt>のこ</rt></ruby>っている。</span>／<span class="translation">Although internationalization has progressed, when all is said and done, Japanese society retains an attitude of looking at foreigners in a special way.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used after a clause, とはいえ means “that is true, but....” Used when the actual result contradicts what is expected from the preceding clause. A formal, mainly written expression. とはいいながら, とはいうものの, and と(は)いっても may be used instead. </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x58534"><span class="number">2. </span>とはいえ</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>病状</rb><rt>びょう じょう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>危険</rb><rt>き けん</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>状態</rb><rt>じょう たい</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>脱</rb><rt>だっ</rt></ruby>して、<ruby><rb>回復</rb><rt>かい ふく</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>向</rb><rt>む</rt></ruby>かっている。とはいえ、まだ<ruby><rb>完全</rb><rt>かん ぜん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>安心</rb><rt>あん しん</rt></ruby>するわけにはいかない。</span>／<span class="translation">She is out of critical condition and on her way to recovery. Having said that, we cannot let our guard down completely yet.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>生徒</rb><rt>せい と</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>非行</rb><rt>ひ こう</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>家庭</rb><rt>か てい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>環境</rb><rt>かん きょう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>強</rb><rt>つよ</rt></ruby>く<ruby><rb>影響</rb><rt>えい きょう</rt></ruby>する。とはいえ、<ruby><rb>学校</rb><rt>がっ こう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>教育</rb><rt>きょう いく</rt></ruby>のあり<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>かた</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>責任</rb><rt>せき にん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>一端</rb><rt>いっ たん</rt></ruby>もある。</span>／<span class="translation">The home environment strongly affect pupils’ delinquency. That said, the current system of school education is also partly responsible for it.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used at the beginning of a sentence, とはいえ refers to the previous sentence and means “that is true, but....” Used when the actual result contradicts what is expected from the previous sentence. A written expression. とはいいながら, とはいうものの, and と(は)いっても may be used instead.</div></body></html>