<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>きわまりない</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0184.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【きる】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0186.xhtml">【きわまる】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x14722">【きわまりない】</h1><h4 class="info">［Na（なこと）きわまりない］</h4><h4 class="info">［A-いこときわまりない］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>その<ruby><rb>探検</rb><rt>たんけん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>旅行</rb><rt>りょ こう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>危険</rb><rt>き けん</rt></ruby>きわまりないものと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>えた。</span>／<span class="translation">They say that the exploration of that region is highly dangerous.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>その<ruby><rb>相手</rb><rt>あい て</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>電話</rb><rt>でん わ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>切</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>り<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>かた</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>不愉快</rb><rt>ふ ゆ かい</rt></ruby>きわまりないものだった。</span>／<span class="translation">The other party’s way of hanging up was really unpleasant.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>そのような<ruby><rb>行動</rb><rt>こう どう</rt></ruby>は、この<ruby><rb>社会</rb><rt>しゃ かい</rt></ruby>では<ruby><rb>無作法</rb><rt>ぶ さ ほう</rt></ruby>（なこと）きわまりないものとされている。</span>／<span class="translation">That sort of action is regarded as very rude in this society.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>丁重</rb><rt>てい ちょう</rt></ruby>きわまりないごあいさつをいただき、まことに<ruby><rb>恐縮</rb><rt>きょう しゅく</rt></ruby>です。</span>／<span class="translation">I wish to thank you sincerely for your very courteous greeting.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>そのけしきは<ruby><rb>美</rb><rt>うつく</rt></ruby>しいこときわまりないものだった。</span>／<span class="translation">The view was stupendously beautiful.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses that something reaches its ultimate limit. Also takes the form きわまる, which has the same meaning, but this form can only be combined with <i>na</i>-adjectives, as in 無作法／丁重／不愉快きわまる. A formal expression used in written language. ことこのうえない may also be used.</div></body></html>