<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ところを</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0582.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ところに】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0584.xhtml">【とされている】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x55311">【ところを】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x55313"><span class="number">1. </span>Vところを...V</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>お<ruby><rb>母</rb><rt>かあ</rt></ruby>さんは<ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>遊</rb><rt>あそ</rt></ruby>んでいるところを<ruby><rb>家</rb><rt>いえ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>窓</rb><rt>まど</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>ていた。</span>／<span class="translation">The mother was watching the children play, from the window of the house. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>こっそりタバコを<ruby><rb>吸</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>っているところを<ruby><rb>先生</rb><rt>せん せい</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>つかった。</span>／<span class="translation">I was sneaking a smoke when my teacher spotted me. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>駅前</rb><rt>えき まえ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>歩</rb><rt>ある</rt></ruby>いているところを<ruby><rb>警官</rb><rt>けい かん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>呼</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>び<ruby><rb>止</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>められた。</span>／<span class="translation">She was walking in front of the station when she was stopped by the police. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>男</rb><rt>おとこ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>金庫</rb><rt>きん こ</rt></ruby>からお<ruby><rb>金</rb><rt>かね</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>盗</rb><rt>ぬす</rt></ruby>み<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>だ</rt></ruby>そうとしているところを<ruby><rb>現行犯</rb><rt>げん こう はん</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>逮捕</rb><rt>たい ほ</rt></ruby>された。</span>／<span class="translation">Just as he was taking the money out of the safe, he was caught in the act and arrested. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>人々</rb><rt>ひと びと</rt></ruby>がぐっすり<ruby><rb>寝込</rb><rt>ね こ</rt></ruby>んだところを<ruby><rb>突然</rb><rt>とつ ぜん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>揺</rb><rt>ゆ</rt></ruby>れが<ruby><rb>襲</rb><rt>おそ</rt></ruby>った。</span>／<span class="translation">The people were sleeping soundly when all of a sudden there was a jolt. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span>あやうく<ruby><rb>暴漢</rb><rt>ぼう かん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>襲</rb><rt>おそ</rt></ruby>われかけたところを<ruby><rb>見知</rb><rt>み し</rt></ruby>らぬ<ruby><rb>男性</rb><rt>だん せい</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>助</rb><rt>たす</rt></ruby>けてもらった。</span>／<span class="translation">Just as I was about to be assaulted by a thug, I got help from a man I had never seen before. </span></div><div class="explanation">This pattern contains two verbs, with the second one denoting an action that exerts a direct effect on the development of the situation expressed by the first. The second verb is a verb of sight or discovery, such as 見る (see), 見つける (find), 見つかる (be found), or 発見する (discover), or a verb that denotes cessation, capture, attack, or rescue, such as 呼び止める (call to a halt), 捕まえる (catch/capture), 捕まる (be caught/be captured), 襲う (attack), or 助ける (save/help). These all share the meaning of halting or obstructing the development of the action or event denoted by the first verb.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x55362"><span class="number">2. </span>...ところ（を）</h2><h4 class="info">［Nのところ（を）］</h4><h4 class="info">［Aところ（を）］</h4><h4 class="info">［R-ちゅうのところ（を）］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>お<ruby><rb>楽</rb><rt>たの</rt></ruby>しみのところを<ruby><rb>恐縮</rb><rt>きょう しゅく</rt></ruby>ですが、ちょっとお<ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>拝借</rb><rt>はい しゃく</rt></ruby>できないでしょうか。</span>／<span class="translation">I am sorry to disturb you while you’re having such a pleasant time, but could I please have a few moments of your time?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>ご<ruby><rb>多忙</rb><rt>た ぼう</rt></ruby>のところ、よくきてくださいました。</span>／<span class="translation">Thank you so much for taking time out of your busy schedule to be here today.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>お<ruby><rb>忙</rb><rt>いそが</rt></ruby>しいところを<ruby><rb>申</rb><rt>もう</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>訳</rb><rt>わけ</rt></ruby>ありませんが、ちょっとお<ruby><rb>邪魔</rb><rt>じゃ ま</rt></ruby>いたします。</span>／<span class="translation">I am very sorry to disturb you, but I’m going to have to interrupt. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>お<ruby><rb>取</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>り<ruby><rb>込</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>み<ruby><rb>中</rb><rt>ちゅう</rt></ruby>のところを<ruby><rb>失礼</rb><rt>しつ れい</rt></ruby>します。</span>／<span class="translation">Please excuse me for intruding when you’re in the middle of something.  </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>お<ruby><rb>休</rb><rt>やす</rt></ruby>み<ruby><rb>中</rb><rt>ちゅう</rt></ruby>のところをお<ruby><rb>電話</rb><rt>でん わ</rt></ruby>してすみませんでした。</span>／<span class="translation">I am sorry to be calling during your vacation. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>難</rb><rt>むずか</rt></ruby>しいことは<ruby><rb>承知</rb><rt>しょう ち</rt></ruby>のうえですが、そこのところをちょっと<ruby><rb>無理</rb><rt>む り</rt></ruby>して<ruby><rb>聞</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>いていただけないでしょうか。</span>／<span class="translation">I am well aware of how difficult this is, but can’t I ask you to make a special effort to consider what I have to say?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（7）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>最近</rb><rt>さい きん</rt></ruby>ちょっと<ruby><rb>忙</rb><rt>いそが</rt></ruby>しくて...。</span>／<span class="translation">I am rather busy these days....</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>そこんところを<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>とかよろしくお<ruby><rb>願</rb><rt>ねが</rt></ruby>いしますよ。</span>／<span class="translation">I know, but I still want to ask you to find some way to help me out.  </span></div><div class="explanation">Used by the speaker to express that <span class="noSeparate">s/he</span> is taking the addressee’s situation into consideration when <span class="noSeparate">s/he</span> is making a difficult or unreasonable request or causing inconvenience to the other person. Often used to preface requests, apologies, or expressions of gratitude. As in (6) and (7), sometimes the previously-stated circumstances are referred to with a demonstrative, resulting in forms like そこのところ (regarding that point). </div></body></html>