<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>とかんがえられる</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0563.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【とかく】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0565.xhtml">【とき】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x53214">【とかんがえられる】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x53216"><span class="number">1. </span>...とかんがえられる</h2><h4 class="info">［N／Na　とかんがえられる］</h4><h4 class="info">［A／V　とかんがえられる］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>このままでは<ruby><rb>日本</rb><rt>に ほん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>映画</rb><rt>えい が</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>産業</rb><rt>さん ぎょう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>落</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>ち<ruby><rb>込</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>む<ruby><rb>一方</rb><rt>いっ ぽう</rt></ruby>だと<ruby><rb>考</rb><rt>かんが</rt></ruby>えられる。</span>／<span class="translation">At this rate, we can expect the Japanese movie industry to continue to slump. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>ここ<ruby><rb>数</rb><rt>すう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>年</rb><rt>ねん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>経済</rb><rt>けい ざい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>動向</rb><rt>どうこう</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>ても、<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>予測</rb><rt>よ そく</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>ほう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>妥当</rb><rt>だ とう</rt></ruby>なのではないかと<ruby><rb>考</rb><rt>かんが</rt></ruby>えられる。</span>／<span class="translation">Looking at the economic trends of the past few years, one can say that his predictions are more valid. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>この<ruby><rb>難解</rb><rt>なん かい</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>文章</rb><rt>ぶん しょう</rt></ruby>を 10 <ruby><rb>歳</rb><rt>さい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>書</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>いたとはとても<ruby><rb>考</rb><rt>かんが</rt></ruby>えられないですね。</span>／<span class="translation">It's incredible to think that such a difficult passage was written by a ten-year-old, isn't it?</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to state one’s own ideas, with the implication that they are objective and have some kind of basis.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x53251"><span class="number">2. </span>...とかんがえられている</h2><h4 class="info">［N／Na　とかんがえられている］</h4><h4 class="info">［A／V　とかんがえられている］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>一般的</rb><rt>いっ ぱん てき</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>英語</rb><rt>えい ご</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>世界</rb><rt>せ かい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>共通語</rb><rt>きょう つう ご</rt></ruby>だと<ruby><rb>考</rb><rt>かんが</rt></ruby>えられているが、<ruby><rb>実際</rb><rt>じっ さい</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>英語</rb><rt>えい ご</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>通</rb><rt>つう</rt></ruby>じない<ruby><rb>国</rb><rt>くに</rt></ruby>はいくらもある。</span>／<span class="translation">Most people think that English is the world's lingua franca, but the fact is there are many countries where English isn’t spoken. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>火星</rb><rt>か せい</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>生物</rb><rt>せい ぶつ</rt></ruby>はいないと<ruby><rb>考</rb><rt>かんが</rt></ruby>えられていましたが、<ruby><rb>今回</rb><rt>こん かい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>探索</rb><rt>たん さく</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>生命</rb><rt>せい めい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>痕跡</rb><rt>こん せき</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>確認</rb><rt>かく にん</rt></ruby>されました。</span>／<span class="translation">Formerly it was believed that there is no life on Mars, but the current investigation has found evidence of its existence. </span></div><div class="explanation">Used to state a commonly held assumption. Often used to say that such an assumption is incorrect, or that it needs to be amended.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x53280"><span class="number">3. </span>...ものとかんがえられる</h2><h4 class="info">［N　であるものとかんがえられる］</h4><h4 class="info">［Na　であるものとかんがえられる］</h4><h4 class="info">［A／V　ものとかんがえられる］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>泥棒</rb><rt>どろ ぼう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>二階</rb><rt>に かい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>窓</rb><rt>まど</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>はい</rt></ruby>ったものと<ruby><rb>考</rb><rt>かんが</rt></ruby>えられる。</span>／<span class="translation">It appears that the burglar entered through a window on the second floor. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>現在</rb><rt>げん ざい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>二酸化</rb><rt>に さん か</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>炭素</rb><rt>たん そ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>排出量</rb><rt>はい しゅつ りょう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>増加</rb><rt>ぞう か</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>傾向</rb><rt>けい こう</rt></ruby>から、<ruby><rb>地球</rb><rt>ち きゅう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>温暖化</rb><rt>おん だん か</rt></ruby>はますます<ruby><rb>進</rb><rt>すす</rt></ruby>むものと<ruby><rb>考</rb><rt>かんが</rt></ruby>えられる。</span>／<span class="translation">Considering the current trend of increasing carbon dioxide emissions, I believe that global warming will continue to progress exponentially. </span></div><div class="explanation">Used to state one’s own ideas, with the implication that they are objective and logically based on various pieces of of supporting evidence. Often used in formal writing, such as scholarly papers or articles.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x53311"><span class="number">4. </span>...ものとかんがえられている</h2><h4 class="info">［N　であるものとかんがえられている］</h4><h4 class="info">［Na　であるものとかんがえられている］</h4><h4 class="info">［A／V　ものとかんがえられている］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>今回</rb><rt>こん かい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>地震</rb><rt>じ しん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>原因</rb><rt>げん いん</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>地下</rb><rt>ちか</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>断層</rb><rt>だんそう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>亀裂</rb><rt>き れつ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>生</rb><rt>しょう</rt></ruby>じたことによるものと<ruby><rb>考</rb><rt>かんが</rt></ruby>えられている。</span>／<span class="translation">It is thought that the cause of this earthquake was a rupture in the underground fault.  </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>携帯</rb><rt>けいたい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>電話</rb><rt>でん わ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>利用者</rb><rt>り よう しゃ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>今後</rb><rt>こん ご</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>急激</rb><rt>きゅう げき</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>増加</rb><rt>ぞう か</rt></ruby>していくものと<ruby><rb>考</rb><rt>かんが</rt></ruby>えられている。</span>／<span class="translation">It is believed that the number of cell phone users will increase drastically in the future.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to state a widely-accepted idea that is acknowledged to be a valid judgment for a variety of reasons. Often used in formal written language. </div></body></html>