<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>けっきょく</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0199.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【けっか】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0201.xhtml">【けっして...ない】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x15960">【けっきょく】</h1><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>バーゲンセールに<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ったが、<ruby><rb>結局</rb><rt>けっ きょく</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なに</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>わないで<ruby><rb>帰</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>ってきた。</span>／<span class="translation">I went to a bargain sale, but I ended up coming home without buying anything. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>結局</rb><rt>けっ きょく</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>世</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>中</rb><rt>なか</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>万事</rb><rt>ばん じ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>金</rb><rt>かね</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>決</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>まるということだよ。</span>／<span class="translation">In the end, money decides everything in this world. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>挑戦者</rb><rt>ちょう せん しゃ</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>善戦</rb><rt>ぜん せん</rt></ruby>したが、<ruby><rb>結局</rb><rt>けっ きょく</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>判定</rb><rt>はん てい</rt></ruby>でチャンピオンが<ruby><rb>勝利</rb><rt>しょう り</rt></ruby>をおさめた。</span>／<span class="translation">The challenger also fought well, but in the end the champion won the decision on points. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>結局</rb><rt>けっ きょく</rt></ruby>のところ、あなたは<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なに</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>いたいのですか。</span>／<span class="translation">So at the end of the day, what do you want to say? </span></div><div class="explanation">Used at the beginning or in the middle of a sentence when stating the final conclusion or result of something. As in (3) and (4), it is sometimes used in the forms 結局は or 結局のところ. Often used to state a conclusion or result settled beyond the power of a person’s will, in spite of <span class="noSeparate">his/her</span> efforts or expectations, and carries the slightly negative connotation of “that’s just the way things are (were).” Consequently, it is unnatural and difficult to use this expression when stating a positive result.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>猛勉強を続け、結局、彼は一流大学に合格した。／He kept studying very hard, and he ended up passing the entrance exam for a first-class university. </div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>猛勉強を続けたが、結局、彼は希望した大学に合格できなかった。／He kept studying very hard, but he ended up not passing the entrance exam for the university of his choice. </div><div class="explanation">In (4), 結局 is followed by an interrogative sentence and its function is to press the listener to draw a conclusion. </div></body></html>