<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>んじゃないだろうか</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part1086.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【んじゃないか】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part1088.xhtml">【んじゃなかったか】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x108534">【んじゃないだろうか】</h1><h4 class="info">［N／Na　（なん）じゃないだろうか］</h4><h4 class="info">［A／V　んじゃないだろうか］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>こんなことが<ruby><rb>起</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>きるなんて<ruby><rb>信</rb><rt>しん</rt></ruby>じられない。<ruby><rb>夢</rb><rt>ゆめ</rt></ruby>（なん）じゃないだろうか。</span>／<span class="translation">I can’t believe that such a thing would happen. It’s like a dream or something.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>あの<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>、ワインの<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>ほう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>好</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>きなんじゃないだろうか。ワインばかり<ruby><rb>飲</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>んでたよ。</span>／<span class="translation">I guess that person likes wine. He was drinking nothing but wine.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>いくら<ruby><rb>浅</rb><rt>あさ</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>川</rb><rt>かわ</rt></ruby>だといっても、あのへんは<ruby><rb>深</rb><rt>ふか</rt></ruby>いんじゃないだろうか。</span>／<span class="translation">Although it’s a shallow river, isn’t that part deep?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>雪</rb><rt>ゆき</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>降</rb><rt>ふ</rt></ruby>っている。<ruby><rb>故郷</rb><rt>こ きょう</rt></ruby>ではもうずいぶん<ruby><rb>積</rb><rt>つ</rt></ruby>もったんじゃないだろうか。</span>／<span class="translation">It’s snowing. It will probably have accumulated quite a bit in my hometown.</span></div><div class="explanation">A spoken expression for (の)ではないだろうか. The polite form is んじゃないでしょうか.</div><h4 class="reference">→<a href="part0486.xhtml#idtitlex1x44168">【ではないだろうか】</a></h4></body></html>