<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>とかく</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0562.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【とか<sub class="variation">2</sub>】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0564.xhtml">【とかんがえられる】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x53142">【とかく】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x53144"><span class="number">1. </span>とかく...がちだ</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>女</rb><rt>おんな</rt></ruby>だというだけでとかく<ruby><rb>軽</rb><rt>かる</rt></ruby>く<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>られがちだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Women tend not to get taken seriously just because of their sex.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>年</rb><rt>とし</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>取</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>ると、とかく<ruby><rb>外</rb><rt>そと</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>るのがおっくうになるものだ。</span>／<span class="translation">When you get older, going out gets to be more and more of a bother. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>われわれはとかく<ruby><rb>学歴</rb><rt>がく れき</rt></ruby>や<ruby><rb>身</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>なりで<ruby><rb>人間</rb><rt>にん げん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>価値</rb><rt>か ち</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>判断</rb><rt>はん だん</rt></ruby>してしまう<ruby><rb>傾向</rb><rt>けい こう</rt></ruby>がある。</span>／<span class="translation">We are often inclined to judge a person’s worth according to his or her academic background or personal appearance. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>とかく<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>世</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>住</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>みにくいものだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Human society is a difficult place to live in. </span></div><div class="explanation">This expression is accompanied at the end of the sentence by expressions such as ...がちだ (prone to), やすい (easy to...), 傾向がある (there is a tendency to...), ものだ (that’s the way it is). It means “if anything, the general trend seems to be such-and-such.” Typically expresses something that is not very good or desirable. Expressions like ともすれば and ややもすると can be used instead of とかく. Generally used in written language.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x53181"><span class="number">2. </span>とかく</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>先</rb><rt>さき</rt></ruby>のことを<ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>からとかく<ruby><rb>心配</rb><rt>しん ぱい</rt></ruby>してもしようがない。</span>／<span class="translation">Fretting now over all kinds of things in the future won't accomplish anything. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>他人</rb><rt>た にん</rt></ruby>のことをとかく<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>う<ruby><rb>前</rb><rt>まえ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>自分</rb><rt>じ ぶん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>責任</rb><rt>せき にん</rt></ruby>をはたすべきだ。</span>／<span class="translation">You ought to carry out your own responsibilities before you start saying this, that, and the other thing about other people. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>とかくしているうちに<ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby>ばかり<ruby><rb>過</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>ぎていった。（<ruby><rb>書</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>きことば<ruby><rb>的</rb><rt>てき</rt></ruby>）</span>／<span class="translation">Meanwhile, time was wasting away. (has the feel of written language) </span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses the way that someone thinks or talks about all kinds of things. Often implies a negative evaluation of that person’s actions or statements. Slightly literary in tone. In modern Japanese, it is more common to use とやかく.</div></body></html>