<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>あえて</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0009.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【あいまって】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0011.xhtml">【あがる】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x278">【あえて】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x280"><span class="number">1. </span>あえて</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>はあえてみなさんに<ruby><rb>規則</rb><rt>き そく</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>見直</rb><rt>み なお</rt></ruby>しを<ruby><rb>提案</rb><rt>てい あん</rt></ruby>したいと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>います。</span>／<span class="translation">I would dare to suggest we re-examine the regulations.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>誰</rb><rt>だれ</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>助</rb><rt>たす</rt></ruby>けてくれないかもしれないが、それでもあえてこの<ruby><rb>計画</rb><rt>けい かく</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>実行</rb><rt>じっ こう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>移</rb><rt>うつ</rt></ruby>したいと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>う。</span>／<span class="translation">Although nobody might help me, I still want to put this plan into action.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>恥</rb><rt>はじ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>忍</rb><rt>しの</rt></ruby>んであえてお<ruby><rb>聞</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>きしますが、<ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>のお<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はなし</rt></ruby>のポイントは<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>だったのでしょうか。</span>／<span class="translation">It’s embarrassing to ask you this, but what was the point of your speech just now?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>反感</rb><rt>はん かん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>うのを<ruby><rb>承知</rb><rt>しょう ち</rt></ruby>であえて<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>いたいのは、<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>らにこの<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>任</rb><rt>まか</rt></ruby>せるのはリスクが<ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>きいということだ。</span>／<span class="translation">I know I will offend them, but I dare say that it is too risky to leave this work to them.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>これができるのはあなたしかいないから、<ruby><rb>負担</rb><rt>ふ たん</rt></ruby>をかけることはわかっていても、あえてお<ruby><rb>願</rb><rt>ねが</rt></ruby>いしているのです。</span>／<span class="translation">I know it is a burden for you, but I dare to ask because only you can do this job. </span></div><div class="explanation">When あえて is followed by a verb of utterance, like 言う, 提案する, お願いする, or verbs like やる, 実行する, it expresses “doing it would offend others or involve risks and difficulties, but I still want to do it, or must do it.” It is used to state a strong opinion or bring up an idea. </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x323"><span class="number">2. </span>あえてV-ば</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>反対</rb><rt>はん たい</rt></ruby>されるのを<ruby><rb>承知</rb><rt>しょう ち</rt></ruby>であえて<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>えば、こんな<ruby><rb>計画</rb><rt>けい かく</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>百害</rb><rt>ひゃく がい</rt></ruby>あって<ruby><rb>一利</rb><rt>いち り</rt></ruby>なしだ。</span>／<span class="translation">I know there may be objections, but if I dare say so, such a plan is harmful and really no good. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>少々</rb><rt>しょう しょう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>いにくいことなのですが、あえて<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>わせていただければ、お<ruby><rb>宅</rb><rt>たく</rt></ruby>のお<ruby><rb>子</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>さんは<ruby><rb>他</rb><rt>ほか</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>学校</rb><rt>がっ こう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>変</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>わられた<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>ほう</rt></ruby>がいいのではないかと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>うのですが。</span>／<span class="translation">It is slightly hard to say, but if I’m allowed to say so, I think your child had better move to another school. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>この<ruby><rb>映画</rb><rt>えい が</rt></ruby>はあまりストーリー<ruby><rb>性</rb><rt>せい</rt></ruby>がないのだが、あえて<ruby><rb>説明</rb><rt>せつ めい</rt></ruby>すれば、<ruby><rb>二組</rb><rt>ふた くみ</rt></ruby>のカップルがあちらこちらを<ruby><rb>旅</rb><rt>たび</rt></ruby>して<ruby><rb>回</rb><rt>まわ</rt></ruby>り、<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>く<ruby><rb>先々</rb><rt>さき ざき</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>事件</rb><rt>じ けん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>起</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>こるというものだ。</span>／<span class="translation">This movie doesn’t have much of a story line, but if I had to explain it, I’d say it’s a story about two couples traveling here and there and troubles happen at every place they visit. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>まだこのプロジェクトの<ruby><rb>方針</rb><rt>ほう しん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>漠然</rb><rt>ばく ぜん</rt></ruby>としているのだが、あえて<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>うとすれば、<ruby><rb>環境破壊</rb><rt>かん きょう は かい</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>進</rb><rt>すす</rt></ruby>んでいる<ruby><rb>地域</rb><rt>ち いき</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>対</rb><rt>たい</rt></ruby>して、<ruby><rb>民間</rb><rt>みん かん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>援助</rb><rt>えん じょ</rt></ruby>によってそれを<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>止</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>めようというものだ。</span>／<span class="translation">The policy of this project is still vague, but if I try to explain it, it is to stop environmental destruction in areas that destruction is taking place, with the support of the private sector.   </span></div><div class="explanation">In these cases, when あえて is followed by a verb of utterance such as 言う, お話しする, or 説明する, it is used as a prefatory expression when one wants to say something in spite an objection or criticism being raised, or when one cannot find an appropriate way to say something.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x360"><span class="number">3. </span>あえて...ない</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>そのやり<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>かた</rt></ruby>にあえて<ruby><rb>反対</rb><rt>はん たい</rt></ruby>はしないが、<ruby><rb>不満</rb><rt>ふ まん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>残</rb><rt>のこ</rt></ruby>っている。</span>／<span class="translation">I don’t dare to object to that way of doing things, but I’m not satisfied with it. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>相手</rb><rt>あい て</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>偉</rb><rt>えら</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>先生</rb><rt>せん せい</rt></ruby>だからといって、あえてへりくだる<ruby><rb>必要</rb><rt>ひつ よう</rt></ruby>もない。</span>／<span class="translation">It is not necessary to be overly modest, even if he is a great teacher. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>親</rb><rt>おや</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>反対</rb><rt>はん たい</rt></ruby>されてまで、あえて<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>結婚</rb><rt>けっ こん</rt></ruby>しようとは<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>わない。</span>／<span class="translation">I won’t dare to marry him, if it’s against my parents’ wishes.   </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>みんなに<ruby><rb>嫌</rb><rt>いや</rt></ruby>がられてまで、あえて<ruby><rb>自分</rb><rt>じ ぶん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>方針</rb><rt>ほう しん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>押</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>通</rb><rt>とお</rt></ruby>すこともないじゃないか。</span>／<span class="translation">Why do you have to push your policy through while putting people off? </span></div><div class="explanation">When expressions like する必要もない, することもない, しようとは思わない follow, あえて expresses the meaning “others would object or be antagonized, so one doesn’t, or shouldn’t, do such a risky thing.”</div></body></html>