<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>てさしあげる</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0459.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【てこそ】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0461.xhtml">【てしかたがない】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x41654">【てさしあげる】</h1><h4 class="info">［V-てさしあげる］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>昨日</rb><rt>きのう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>社長</rb><rt>しゃ ちょう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>車</rb><rt>くるま</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>家</rb><rt>いえ</rt></ruby>まで<ruby><rb>送</rb><rt>おく</rt></ruby>ってさしあげた。</span>／<span class="translation">I took the president home by car yesterday.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><span class="number">A:</span>あなた、お<ruby><rb>客様</rb><rt>きゃく さま</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>駅</rb><rt>えき</rt></ruby>までお<ruby><rb>見送</rb><rt>み おく</rt></ruby>りしてさしあげたら？</span>／<span class="translation">《wife speaking to husband》Why don’t you take our guests to the station to see them off?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>うん、そうだな。</span>／<span class="translation">OK, I’ll do that.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>田中</rb><rt>た なか</rt></ruby>さんをご<ruby><rb>存</rb><rt>ぞん</rt></ruby>じないのなら、<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>ほう</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>連絡</rb><rt>れん らく</rt></ruby>してさしあげましょうか。</span>／<span class="translation">If you do not know Tanaka-san, shall I contact him for you?</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses that the speaker (or someone on the side of the speaker) does an action for other people. Often used when the person receiving the action is superior or equal to, but not close to, the speaker. sed to express, in a humble way, that the speaker does something for someone who is having problems or cannot do the action which the speaker can do. However, it can also give the impression of forcing something upon someone.</div><div class="explanation">Thus, it is strange to use this form when directly addressing a higher-status person. When one does use it, it will sound impolite unless one avoids using the forms V-てさしあげます／ましょう, as in (3), in order to soften the impression of forcing something upon someone. In polite speech, humble forms such as お送りした and ご連絡しましょうか are usually used.</div></body></html>