<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>とみえて</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0621.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【とはちがって】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0623.xhtml">【とも】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x58768">【とみえて】</h1><h4 class="info">［N／Na　（だ）とみえて］</h4><h4 class="info">［A／V　とみえて］</h4><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x58774"><span class="number">1. </span>...とみえて</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>最近</rb><rt>さい きん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>忙</rb><rt>いそが</rt></ruby>しいとみえて、いつ<ruby><rb>電話</rb><rt>でん わ</rt></ruby>しても<ruby><rb>留守</rb><rt>る す</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">He must be very busy recently, because he is not in whenever I call.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>夜中</rb><rt>よ なか</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>雨</rb><rt>あめ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>降</rb><rt>ふ</rt></ruby>ったとみえて、<ruby><rb>水</rb><rt>みず</rt></ruby>たまりができている。</span>／<span class="translation">It seems to have rained during the night, because there are puddles outside.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なに</rt></ruby>かいいことがあったとみえて、<ruby><rb>朝</rb><rt>あさ</rt></ruby>からずっとにこにこしている。</span>／<span class="translation">Something nice must have happened to him, because he’s been grinning since morning.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>隣</rb><rt>となり</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>家</rb><rt>いえ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>留守</rb><rt>る す</rt></ruby>とみえて、ドアの<ruby><rb>前</rb><rt>まえ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>数日分</rb><rt>すう じつ ぶん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>新聞</rb><rt>しん ぶん</rt></ruby>がたまっている。</span>／<span class="translation">It looks like our next-door neighbor is away, because there are newspapers from the past several days piled up in front of the door.</span></div><div class="explanation">States a conjecture based on a current state of affairs. The first clause contains the speaker’s conjecture, and the second presents the reason or basis for this conjecture. For instance, in (2) above, the speaker states the conjecture 夜中に雨が降ったようだ (it looks like it rained during the night) in the first clause, and this conjecture is based on the state of affairs 水たまりができている (there are puddles) given in the second clause. The second clause describes a fact that the speaker has actually observed.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x58811"><span class="number">2. </span>...とみえる</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>今日</rb><rt>きょう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>田中</rb><rt>た なか</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>君</rb><rt>くん</rt></ruby>はやけに<ruby><rb>気前</rb><rt>き まえ</rt></ruby>がいい。<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なに</rt></ruby>かいいことがあったとみえる。</span>／<span class="translation">Today Tanaka-kun is being unusually generous with his money. Something good must have happened.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>合格</rb><rt>ごう かく</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>発表</rb><rt>はっ ぴょう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>った<ruby><rb>妹</rb><rt>いもうと</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>帰</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>ってくるなり<ruby><rb>部屋</rb><rt>へ や</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>閉</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>じ<ruby><rb>込</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>もってしまった。どうも<ruby><rb>不合格</rb><rt>ふ ごう かく</rt></ruby>だったとみえる。</span>／<span class="translation">As soon as my sister, who went to find out her results for the entrance exam, got back, she locked herself in her room. It looks like she failed. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>学生</rb><rt>がく せい</rt></ruby>にパソコンの<ruby><rb>使</rb><rt>つか</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>かた</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>説明</rb><rt>せつ めい</rt></ruby>したが、ほかの<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>聞</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>いているところを<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>ると、<ruby><rb>一度</rb><rt>いち ど</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>聞</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>いただけではよくわからなかったとみえる。</span>／<span class="translation">Although I explained to the student how to use a computer, it seems that hearing it just once was not enough for him to understand, because I saw him asking someone else.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>花子</rb><rt>はな こ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>先生</rb><rt>せん せい</rt></ruby>にほめられた<ruby><rb>絵</rb><rt>え</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>会</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>う<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>ごとに<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>せている。ほめられたことがよほどうれしかったとみえる。</span>／<span class="translation">Hanako shows the drawing her teacher praised her for to everyone she sees. She must have been so happy that she was praised. </span></div><div class="explanation">とみえる is used to state, as if the speaker were talking to <span class="noSeparate">him/her</span>self, a conjecture based on what <span class="noSeparate">s/he</span> has observed. Young Japanese speakers do not use this expression very often. </div></body></html>