<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>なり2</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0713.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【なり<sub class="variation">1</sub>】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0715.xhtml">【なり<sub class="variation">3</sub>】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x66490">【なり<sub class="variation">2</sub>】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x66493"><span class="number">1. </span>...なり</h2><h4 class="info">［Nなり］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-るなり］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なに</rt></ruby>かお<ruby><rb>飲物</rb><rt>のみ もの</rt></ruby>なりお<ruby><rb>持</rb><rt>も</rt></ruby>ちしましょうか。</span>／<span class="translation">Shall I bring you a drink or something?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>そんなに<ruby><rb>忙</rb><rt>いそが</rt></ruby>しいんだったら<ruby><rb>友達</rb><rt>とも だち</rt></ruby>になり<ruby><rb>手伝</rb><rt>て つだ</rt></ruby>ってもらったらいいのに。</span>／<span class="translation">If you are so busy, you should ask a friend or somebody to help you.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>そんなに<ruby><rb>心配</rb><rt>しん ぱい</rt></ruby>なら<ruby><rb>先生</rb><rt>せん せい</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>相談</rb><rt>そう だん</rt></ruby>するなりしてみてはどうですか。</span>／<span class="translation">If you are worrying that much, why don’t you do something like consult your teacher?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>壁</rb><rt>かべ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>絵</rb><rt>え</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>飾</rb><rt>かざ</rt></ruby>るなりしたらもっと<ruby><rb>落</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>ちつくと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>いますよ。</span>／<span class="translation">I think doing something like putting pictures on the wall would calm the mood more.</span></div><div class="explanation">Attaches to a variety of elements such as nouns and verbs and is used to refer to one possibility among several others as an example.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x66534"><span class="number">2. </span>V-るなりV-ないなり</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>くなり<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>かないなりはっきり<ruby><rb>決</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>めてほしい。</span>／<span class="translation">I want you to decide whether you are going to go or not.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>やるなりやらないなり、はっきりした<ruby><rb>態度</rb><rt>たい ど</rt></ruby>をとらなければならない。</span>／<span class="translation">Whether you do it or not, you must make up your mind.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>るなり<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>ないなりをきちんと<ruby><rb>連絡</rb><rt>れん らく</rt></ruby>してもらわなければ<ruby><rb>困</rb><rt>こま</rt></ruby>ります。</span>／<span class="translation">If you won’t give me a definite answer as to whether or not you’re coming, I’ll have trouble.</span></div><div class="explanation">With an affirmative form of a verb followed by a negative form of the same verb, expresses the meaning of choosing one over the other. Followed by expressions indicating that choosing one over the other is required, desired, or suggested. Since V-るなりV-ないなり involves the speaker’s feeling to force the other party to choose one over the other, this expression could be considered rude if used inappropriately. </div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>参加なさるなりなさらないなりをお知らせください。／Please let me know whether you will attend or not.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>参加なさるかどうかをお知らせください。／Kindly let me know whether you will be attending or not.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x66583"><span class="number">3. </span>...なり...なり</h2><h4 class="info">［NなりNなり］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-るなりV-るなり］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>父親</rb><rt>ちち おや</rt></ruby>なり<ruby><rb>母親</rb><rt>はは おや</rt></ruby>なりに<ruby><rb>相談</rb><rt>そう だん</rt></ruby>しなければならないだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">I should probably consult an appropriate person like his father or mother, for instance.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>東京</rb><rt>とう きょう</rt></ruby>なり<ruby><rb>大阪</rb><rt>おお さか</rt></ruby>なり、<ruby><rb>好</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>きなところで<ruby><rb>生活</rb><rt>せい かつ</rt></ruby>すればいい。</span>／<span class="translation">I don’t care whether it will be in Tokyo or in Osaka or wherever—live someplace you like.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>叱</rb><rt>しか</rt></ruby>るなり<ruby><rb>誉</rb><rt>ほ</rt></ruby>めるなり、はっきりとした<ruby><rb>態度</rb><rt>たい ど</rt></ruby>をとらなければだめだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Whether you scold or praise him, you need to have a clear idea of your own stance.</span></div><div class="explanation">NなりNなり and V-るなりV-るなり express the meaning of choosing between two things in the same group. It implies that there are some other possibilities in addition to the two.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x66618"><span class="number">4. </span>...なりなんなり</h2><h4 class="info">［N／V　なりなんなり］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>チューリップなりなんなり、<ruby><rb>少</rb><rt>すこ</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>目立</rb><rt>め だ</rt></ruby>つ<ruby><rb>花</rb><rt>はな</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>ってきて<ruby><rb>下</rb><rt>くだ</rt></ruby>さい。</span>／<span class="translation">Please go buy some flowers—like tulips—that are a little showy. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>ここは<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>支払</rb><rt>し はら</rt></ruby>いますからコーヒーなりなんなり<ruby><rb>好</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>きなものを<ruby><rb>注文</rb><rt>ちゅう もん</rt></ruby>して<ruby><rb>下</rb><rt>くだ</rt></ruby>さい。</span>／<span class="translation">I’ll pay for you here, so please order coffee or anything you like.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>転地</rb><rt>てん ち</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>療養</rb><rt>りょう よう</rt></ruby>するなり<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>なりして<ruby><rb>少</rb><rt>すこ</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>体</rb><rt>からだ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>休</rb><rt>やす</rt></ruby>めたほうがいい。</span>／<span class="translation">You should go somewhere for a change or do something to take at least a little rest. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>この<ruby><rb>部屋</rb><rt>へ や</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>寒</rb><rt>さむ</rt></ruby>そうだから、カーペットを<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>れるなり<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>なりしなければいけないね。</span>／<span class="translation">We need to carpet this room or do something because it seems cold. </span></div><div class="explanation">N/Vなりなんなり expresses the meaning that anything would be fine if it is similar to what the speaker mentions. When it refers to a place, ...なりどこなり is used. </div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>外国なりどこなり、好きなところへ行ってしまえ。／Whether it’s a foreign country or somewhere else, go anywhere you like.</div></body></html>