<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>られる1</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part1045.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【られたい】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part1047.xhtml">【られる<sub class="variation">2</sub>】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x105169">【られる<sub class="variation">1</sub>】</h1><div class="explanation">This is the passive voice. In cases where the V in V-られる is a Group 1 verb, the dictionary form ending changes to the <i>a</i>-row and れる is added, as in 行く(go)→行かれる and 飲む(drink)→飲まれる. Where Group 2 verbs are used られる is added to the stem, as in 食べる(eat)→食べられる. 来る(come) becomes こられる and する(do) becomes される. V-られる conjugates in the same way as Group 2 verbs.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x105188"><span class="number">1. </span>NがV-られる〈direct passive〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>この<ruby><rb>地方</rb><rt>ち ほう</rt></ruby>ではおもに<ruby><rb>赤</rb><rt>あか</rt></ruby>ワインが<ruby><rb>作</rb><rt>つく</rt></ruby>られている。</span>／<span class="translation">In this region red wine is primarily made.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>木曜日</rb><rt>もく よう び</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>会議</rb><rt>かい ぎ</rt></ruby>は3<ruby><rb>時</rb><rt>じ</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>開</rb><rt>ひら</rt></ruby>かれることになっている。</span>／<span class="translation">Thursday’s meeting will be started at three o’clock.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>この<ruby><rb>辞書</rb><rt>じ しょ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>昔</rb><rt>むかし</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>使</rb><rt>つか</rt></ruby>われているいい<ruby><rb>辞書</rb><rt>じ しょ</rt></ruby>だが、<ruby><rb>最近</rb><rt>さい きん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>外来語</rb><rt>がい らい ご</rt></ruby>などはのっていない。</span>／<span class="translation">This is a good dictionary that has been used for a long time but it doesn’t contain recent loan words.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>昨夜</rb><rt>さく や</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>駅前</rb><rt>えき まえ</rt></ruby>のデパートで1<ruby><rb>億円</rb><rt>おく えん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>相当</rb><rt>そう とう</rt></ruby>のネックレスや<ruby><rb>指輪</rb><rt>ゆび わ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>盗</rb><rt>ぬす</rt></ruby>まれた。</span>／<span class="translation">Last night, necklaces and rings worth 100 million yen were stolen from the department store in front of the station.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>来月</rb><rt>らい げつ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>発売</rb><rt>はつ ばい</rt></ruby>される<ruby><rb>車</rb><rt>くるま</rt></ruby>のカタログを<ruby><rb>手</rb><rt>て</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>れた。</span>／<span class="translation">I got hold of a catalogue of cars to go on sale from next month.</span></div><div class="explanation">This is used to give as the subject a thing which is acted upon or which is affected. Often used in factual descriptive sentences and in informative sentences. As the agent cannot be identified, it is usual for it not to appear in the sentence.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x105231"><span class="number">2. </span>NがNにV-られる</h2><h3 class="subsubtitle" id="idsubsubtitlex1x105237"><span class="number">a. </span>NがNに（よって）V-られる〈direct passive〉</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>漫画</rb><rt>まん が</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>週刊誌</rb><rt>しゅう かん し</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>若</rb><rt>わか</rt></ruby>いサラリーマンによく<ruby><rb>読</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>まれている。</span>／<span class="translation">Weekly <i>manga</i> magazines are often read by young businessmen.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>その<ruby><rb>寺院</rb><rt>じ いん</rt></ruby>は7<ruby><rb>世紀</rb><rt>せい き</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>中国</rb><rt>ちゅう ごく</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>渡来</rb><rt>と らい</rt></ruby>した<ruby><rb>僧侶</rb><rt>そう りょ</rt></ruby>によって<ruby><rb>建</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>てられた。</span>／<span class="translation">That temple was built by a priest who came over from China in the seventh century.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>このあたりの<ruby><rb>土地</rb><rt>と ち</rt></ruby>はダイオキシンに<ruby><rb>汚染</rb><rt>お せん</rt></ruby>されている。</span>／<span class="translation">The soil in this area is contaminated with dioxin.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>地震後</rb><rt>じ しん ご</rt></ruby>、その<ruby><rb>教会</rb><rt>きょう かい</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>地域</rb><rt>ち いき</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>住民</rb><rt>じゅう みん</rt></ruby>によって<ruby><rb>再建</rb><rt>さい けん</rt></ruby>された。</span>／<span class="translation">After the earthquake, that church was rebuilt by the local residents.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>その<ruby><rb>展覧会</rb><rt>てん らん かい</rt></ruby>はフォード<ruby><rb>財団</rb><rt>ざい だん</rt></ruby>によって<ruby><rb>支援</rb><rt>し えん</rt></ruby>されている。</span>／<span class="translation">That exhibition is supported by the Ford Foundation.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to give as the subject a thing which is acted upon or which is affected. It is often used in factual descriptive sentences and in informative sentences. The agent is indicated by Nに or Nによって. In cases regarding the production of a thing (a work or building), and in formal speech, によって is primarily used.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x105286"><span class="number">b. </span>NがN　に／から　V-られる〈direct passive〉</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>おばあさんが<ruby><rb>犬</rb><rt>いぬ</rt></ruby>にかまれた。</span>／<span class="translation">An elderly lady was bitten by a dog.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>その<ruby><rb>子</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>母親</rb><rt>はは おや</rt></ruby>にしかられて、<ruby><rb>泣</rb><rt>な</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>だ</rt></ruby>した。</span>／<span class="translation">That child was scolded by his mother and burst out crying.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>皆</rb><rt>みな</rt></ruby>にかわいがられて<ruby><rb>育</rb><rt>そだ</rt></ruby>った。</span>／<span class="translation">She was raised being doted on by everyone.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>森</rb><rt>もり</rt></ruby>さんは<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>らない<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はな</rt></ruby>しかけられた。</span>／<span class="translation">Mori-san was spoken to by a stranger.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>正直</rb><rt>しょう じき</rt></ruby>なので、だれからも<ruby><rb>信頼</rb><rt>しん らい</rt></ruby>されている。</span>／<span class="translation">Because he is honest, he is trusted by everyone.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>夜中</rb><rt>よ なか</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>騒</rb><rt>さわ</rt></ruby>いだら、<ruby><rb>近所</rb><rt>きん じょ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>注意</rb><rt>ちゅう い</rt></ruby>されてしまった。</span>／<span class="translation">When I made a lot of noise late at night, a neighbour admonished me.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to give as the subject a person who is acted upon or who is affected. A way of expressing a thing which occurs between two people from the viewpoint of someone other than the agent. The agent is indicated by Nに but when an action showing that a feeling, information or remark is given by the agent Nから is also used. When the speaker is affected by the action, the passive voice is often used to express the speaker’s viewpoint. Furthermore, it is usual for the sentence to convey the point of view of one person.  </div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>夜中に騒いだら、近所の人が注意した。／I was noisy in the middle of the night and someone from the neighborhood admonished me.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>夜中に騒いだら、近所の人に注意された。／I was noisy in the middle of the night and was admonished by someone from the neighborhood.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x105356"><span class="number">c. </span>NがNにV-られる〈indirect passive〉</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>忙</rb><rt>いそが</rt></ruby>しいときに<ruby><rb>客</rb><rt>きゃく</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>られて、<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>ができなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">I had a visitor while I was busy and so I couldn’t do my work.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>日曜日</rb><rt>にち よう び</rt></ruby>はいかがでしたか。</span>／<span class="translation">How was Sunday?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span><ruby><rb>家族</rb><rt>か ぞく</rt></ruby>でハイキングに<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ったんですが、<ruby><rb>途中</rb><rt>と ちゅう</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>雨</rb><rt>あめ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>降</rb><rt>ふ</rt></ruby>られましてね。</span>／<span class="translation">I went hiking with my family but we were rained on while along the way.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">A:</span>それは<ruby><rb>大変</rb><rt>たい へん</rt></ruby>でしたね。</span>／<span class="translation">Oh, that was too bad.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>奥</rb><rt>おく</rt></ruby>さんに<ruby><rb>逃</rb><rt>に</rt></ruby>げられて、すっかり<ruby><rb>元気</rb><rt>げん き</rt></ruby>をなくしてしまった。</span>／<span class="translation">He was deserted by his wife and completely lost his will to live.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>子</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>どもに<ruby><rb>死</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>なれた<ruby><rb>親</rb><rt>おや</rt></ruby>ほどかわいそうなものはない。</span>／<span class="translation">There is nothing as sad as a parent who has a child die.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to relate the standpoint of a person adversely affected by something which has caused their situation. Corresponds with the respective active sentence which uses an intransitive verb such as 客が来る(visitors are coming) and 雨が降る(it rains). The agent is indicated by Nに but Nによって and Nから cannot be used.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x105415"><span class="number">3. </span>NがNにNをV-られる</h2><h3 class="subsubtitle" id="idsubsubtitlex1x105421"><span class="number">a. </span>NがNにNをV-られる〈possessor passive〉</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>森</rb><rt>もり</rt></ruby>さんは<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>らない<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>名前</rb><rt>な まえ</rt></ruby>をよばれた。</span>／<span class="translation">Mori-san’s name was called by a stranger.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>わたしは<ruby><rb>今朝</rb><rt>け さ</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>電車</rb><rt>でん しゃ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>中</rb><rt>なか</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>足</rb><rt>あし</rt></ruby>をふまれた。</span>／<span class="translation">This morning my foot was trodden upon on the train.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>犯人</rb><rt>はん にん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>警官</rb><rt>けい かん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>頭</rb><rt>あたま</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>撃</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>たれて<ruby><rb>重傷</rb><rt>じゅう しょう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>負</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>った。</span>／<span class="translation">The offender was injured after being struck over the head by a police officer.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>先生</rb><rt>せん せい</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>発音</rb><rt>はつ おん</rt></ruby>をほめられて<ruby><rb>英語</rb><rt>えい ご</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>好</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>きになった。</span>／<span class="translation">I came to like English after my pronunciation was praised by my teacher. </span></div><div class="explanation">Used to give as the subject the owner of the thing which is acted upon or affected. Used to show that, through an action which is done to a thing, the owner of that thing is troubled or perplexed. The thing possessed by the owner (such as their name, foot, or head) is indicated in the form Nを. If this possession is taken as the subject, the effect is often unnatural.  </div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>私の足がふまれた。／My foot was trodden on.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>私は足をふまれた。／I had my foot trodden upon.</div><div class="explanation">When the action is welcome from the point of view of the speaker, expressions which demonstrate gratitude such as V-てもらった are often used but, as in the ほめる of example (4), when a verb which essentially has a positive meaning is used in the passive voice, the development of feelings such as embarrassment or pride is implied.  </div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x105489"><span class="number">b. </span>NがNにNをV-られる〈indirect passive〉</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>せまい<ruby><rb>部屋</rb><rt>へ や</rt></ruby>でタバコを<ruby><rb>吸</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>われると<ruby><rb>気</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>分</rb><rt>ぶん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>悪</rb><rt>わる</rt></ruby>くなる。</span>／<span class="translation">When someone smokes in a small room it makes me feel sick.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>夜遅</rb><rt>よる おそ</rt></ruby>くまで<ruby><rb>会社</rb><rt>かい しゃ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>残</rb><rt>のこ</rt></ruby>って<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>をされると、<ruby><rb>電気代</rb><rt>でん き だい</rt></ruby>がかかって<ruby><rb>困</rb><rt>こま</rt></ruby>る。</span>／<span class="translation">If someone stays late working at the company, I worry that it costs electricity.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>次々</rb><rt>つぎ つぎ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>料理</rb><rt>りょう り</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>だ</rt></ruby>されて、とても<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べきれなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">One dish after another was brought out and I just couldn’t eat it all.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>台所</rb><rt>だい どころ</rt></ruby>のテーブルの<ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>うえ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>宿題</rb><rt>しゅく だい</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>広</rb><rt>ひろ</rt></ruby>げられると<ruby><rb>晩御飯</rb><rt>ばん ご はん</rt></ruby>のしたくができないから、はやくどけなさい。</span>／<span class="translation">I want to prepare dinner but can’t if your homework is spread all over the table, so hurry up and move it.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>結婚</rb><rt>けっ こん</rt></ruby>はおめでたいけど、<ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>あなたに<ruby><rb>会社</rb><rt>かい しゃ</rt></ruby>をやめられるのは<ruby><rb>痛手</rb><rt>いた で</rt></ruby>だなあ。</span>／<span class="translation">Congratulations on your marriage, but it’s a blow to us that you’re leaving the company.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to express the standpoint of a person indirectly bothered by a thing which has happened to cause their situation. It corresponds with the respective active sentence which uses an transitive verb such as (だれかが)タバコを吸う and (だれかが)仕事をする and demonstrates that the speaker is troubled because of that. The agent is indicated by Nに but Nによって and Nから cannot be used. Often the agent is not indicated.</div></body></html>