<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>どうせ</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0545.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【どうじに】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0547.xhtml">【どうぜん】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x51250">【どうせ】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x51252"><span class="number">1. </span>どうせ</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>どうせ<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>馬鹿</rb><rt>ば か</rt></ruby>ですよ。</span>／<span class="translation">After all, I'm a fool. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>三日</rb><rt>みっか</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>坊主</rb><rt>ぼう ず</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>のことだから、どうせ<ruby><rb>長続</rb><rt>なが つづ</rt></ruby>きはしないだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">He can never stick to anything, so I don't expect this to last anyway.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses an attitude of resignation or carelessness on the part of the speaker, in the sense that regardless of what <span class="noSeparate">s/he</span> does, the conclusion or outcome is foregone and cannot be changed by the will or effort of an individual. Often followed by the description of an undesirable situation.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x51277"><span class="number">2. </span>どうせ...（の）なら</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>どうせやるならもっと<ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>きいことをやれ。</span>／<span class="translation">If you’re going to do it, then do something bigger. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>どうせ<ruby><rb>参加</rb><rt>さん か</rt></ruby>しないのなら、<ruby><rb>早</rb><rt>はや</rt></ruby>めに<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>らせておいたほうがいい。</span>／<span class="translation">If you’re not going to attend anyway, you ought to tell them early. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>どうせ2か<ruby><rb>月</rb><rt>げつ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>余</rb><rt>あま</rt></ruby>りの<ruby><rb>命</rb><rt>いのち</rt></ruby>なら、<ruby><rb>本人</rb><rt>ほん にん</rt></ruby>のやりたいことをやらせたい。</span>／<span class="translation">If she only has about two months left to live, I want to let her do anything she wants. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>急</rb><rt>いそ</rt></ruby>いでもどうせ<ruby><rb>間</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>合</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>わないのだったら、ゆっくり<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>こう。</span>／<span class="translation">If we can’t get there on time even if we hurry, let’s take our time.  </span></div><div class="explanation">Means “if such-and-such an outcome will follow in any case” and is used to state an attitude or action that should be taken under such circumstances. The phrase ...のだったら may also be used. Followed by an expression that indicates the speaker’s effort to influence the addressee through <span class="noSeparate">his/her</span> will, hope, obligation, command, or invitation.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x51314"><span class="number">3. </span>どうせV-るいじょう（は）</h2><h3 class="subsubtitle" id="idparagraphx1x51317"><span class="number"></span>どうせV-るからには</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>やる<ruby><rb>以上</rb><rt>い じょう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>必</rb><rt>かなら</rt></ruby>ず<ruby><rb>成功</rb><rt>せい こう</rt></ruby>して<ruby><rb>戻</rb><rt>もど</rt></ruby>ってこい。</span>／<span class="translation">If you’re going to do it, then make sure you succeed before you return.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>どうせ<ruby><rb>試合</rb><rt>し あい</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>るからには、<ruby><rb>必</rb><rt>かなら</rt></ruby>ず<ruby><rb>優勝</rb><rt>ゆう しょう</rt></ruby>してみせる。</span>／<span class="translation">Since I’m going to compete in the match, I’ll show you a victory. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>どうせ<ruby><rb>留学</rb><rt>りゅう がく</rt></ruby>するからには、<ruby><rb>博士号</rb><rt>はか せ ごう</rt></ruby>まで<ruby><rb>取</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>って<ruby><rb>帰</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>ってきたい。</span>／<span class="translation">As long as I’m going to study abroad, I'd like to go all the way and bring home a doctorate. </span></div><div class="explanation">Means “such-and-such an action has been predetermined, so....” Followed by an expression of the speaker's will, hope, obligation, command, or invitation with respect to the addressee.  </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x51348"><span class="number">4. </span>どうせ...のだから</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>どうせ<ruby><rb>間</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>合</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>わないのだから、いまさらあわてても<ruby><rb>仕方</rb><rt>し かた</rt></ruby>がない。</span>／<span class="translation">Since we aren’t going to make it in time anyway, there’s no point in scrambling now. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>どうせ<ruby><rb>合格</rb><rt>ごう かく</rt></ruby>するはずがないのだから、<ruby><rb>気楽</rb><rt>き らく</rt></ruby>にいこう。</span>／<span class="translation">Since there isn’t any chance that I’ll pass the exam anyway, I’m just going to take it easy.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>どうせやらなければならないのだから、<ruby><rb>早</rb><rt>はや</rt></ruby>めにやってしまいましょう。</span>／<span class="translation">Since we have to do it anyway, let’s get it out of the way early. </span></div><div class="explanation">Used to express the speaker’s intention or judgment regarding a situation with a foregone conclusion or outcome. Often followed by an expression that indicates the speaker’s attitude of resignation or carelessness regarding the situation.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x51379"><span class="number">5. </span>どうせ（のこと）だから</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>どうせのことだから、<ruby><rb>飛</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>び<ruby><rb>切</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>り<ruby><rb>高級</rb><rt>こう きゅう</rt></ruby>なホテルに<ruby><rb>泊</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>まろう。</span>／<span class="translation">Since we have to stay somewhere, let’s stay at a really posh hotel.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>どうせのことだから、<ruby><rb>駅</rb><rt>えき</rt></ruby>までお<ruby><rb>送</rb><rt>おく</rt></ruby>りします。</span>／<span class="translation">Since I’m going that way anyway, I’ll drive you to the station.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>当分</rb><rt>とう ぶん</rt></ruby>バスも<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>ないみたいだし、どうせだからお<ruby><rb>茶</rb><rt>ちゃ</rt></ruby>でも<ruby><rb>飲</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>まない？</span>／<span class="translation">It looks like there won’t be a bus for awhile, so as long as we’re here, would you like to get something to drink?</span></div><div class="explanation">An idiomatic expression that means “in any case, doing...is a foregone conclusion, so....” Often followed by expressions of intention or invitation, such as 思い切って...しよう (I’m going to/let’s take the plunge and do such-and-such) or ついでに...しよう (I’m going to/let’s do such-and-such along with something else). In spoken language, the form どうせだから is often used.</div></body></html>