<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>はんいで</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0895.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【はやいか】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0897.xhtml">【はんたいに】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x83264">【はんいで】</h1><h4 class="info">［Nのはんいで］</h4><h4 class="info">［NからNのはんいで］</h4><h4 class="info">［Vはんいで］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>にわかる<ruby><rb>範囲</rb><rt>はん い</rt></ruby>でよければお<ruby><rb>答</rb><rt>こた</rt></ruby>えしましょう。</span>／<span class="translation">If the best of my knowledge is sufficient for you, I will answer.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>差</rb><rt>さ</rt></ruby>しつかえない<ruby><rb>範囲</rb><rt>はん い</rt></ruby>でお<ruby><rb>答</rb><rt>こた</rt></ruby>え<ruby><rb>下</rb><rt>くだ</rt></ruby>さい。</span>／<span class="translation">Please answer to whatever extent suits you.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>駅</rb><rt>えき</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>歩</rb><rt>ある</rt></ruby>いて 10 <ruby><rb>分</rb><rt>ぷん</rt></ruby>ぐらいの<ruby><rb>範囲</rb><rt>はん い</rt></ruby>で、いいアパートはありませんか。</span>／<span class="translation">Are there any nice apartments within a ten-minute walking distance of the station?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>今日</rb><rt>きょう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>午後</rb><rt>ご ご</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>花火</rb><rt>はな び</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>工場</rb><rt>こう じょう</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>爆発</rb><rt>ばく はつ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>事故</rb><rt>じ こ</rt></ruby>がありました。<ruby><rb>半径</rb><rt>はん けい</rt></ruby>5キロから 10 キロの<ruby><rb>範囲</rb><rt>はん い</rt></ruby>で、<ruby><rb>被害</rb><rt>ひ がい</rt></ruby>があったもようです。</span>／<span class="translation">There was an explosion at the fireworks factory this afternoon. Apparently there was damage within a five- to ten-kilometer radius of the site. </span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses a certain limited extent. </div></body></html>