<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>てならない</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0471.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【でなくては】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0473.xhtml">【てのこと】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x42301">【てならない】</h1><h4 class="info">［Na でならない］</h4><h4 class="info">［A-くてならない］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-てならない］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>卒業</rb><rt>そつ ぎょう</rt></ruby>できるかどうか、<ruby><rb>心配</rb><rt>しん ぱい</rt></ruby>でならない。</span>／<span class="translation">I am beside myself with worry about whether or not I’ll be able to graduate.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>将来</rb><rt>しょう らい</rt></ruby>がどうなるか、<ruby><rb>不安</rb><rt>ふ あん</rt></ruby>でならない。</span>／<span class="translation">Thinking about the future gives me great concern.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>のころニンジンを<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べるのがいやでならなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">When I was a child, having to eat carrots repulsed me.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>あのコンサートに<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>損</rb><rt>そこ</rt></ruby>ねたのが<ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>でも<ruby><rb>残念</rb><rt>ざん ねん</rt></ruby>でならない。</span>／<span class="translation">I will never stop regretting that we missed going to that concert.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>住</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>み<ruby><rb>慣</rb><rt>な</rt></ruby>れたこの<ruby><rb>土地</rb><rt>と ち</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>離</rb><rt>はな</rt></ruby>れるのがつらくてならない。</span>／<span class="translation">It is really painful for us to leave this place that has been our home for such a long time.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span>だまされてお<ruby><rb>金</rb><rt>かね</rt></ruby>をとられたのがくやしくてならない。</span>／<span class="translation">I am so ticked off at getting cheated out of my money.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（7）</span><ruby><rb>青春</rb><rt>せい しゅん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>時代</rb><rt>じ だい</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>過</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>ごした<ruby><rb>北海道</rb><rt>ほっ かい どう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>山々</rb><rt>やま やま</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>だ</rt></ruby>されてならない。</span>／<span class="translation">I can’t help recalling the mountains of Hokkaido, where I spent my youth.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（8）</span>きのうの<ruby><rb>英語</rb><rt>えい ご</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>試験</rb><rt>し けん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>結果</rb><rt>けっ か</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>気</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>になってならない。</span>／<span class="translation">The results of yesterday’s English exam are really bothering me.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（9）</span><ruby><rb>大切</rb><rt>たい せつ</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>試験</rb><rt>し けん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>失敗</rb><rt>しっ ぱい</rt></ruby>してしまった。なぜもっと<ruby><rb>早</rb><rt>はや</rt></ruby>くから<ruby><rb>勉強</rb><rt>べん きょう</rt></ruby>しておかなかったのかと<ruby><rb>悔</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>やまれてならない。</span>／<span class="translation">I failed an important exam. I am filled with regret that I didn’t start studying sooner.  </span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses a feeling or state of emotion that is the natural outcome of a situation and beyond the control of the speaker. Often used to indicate a state of mind that cannot be suppressed, resulting in a highly emotional condition. てならない is preceded by words denoting emotion or feeling or desire. If words that refer to characteristics or evaluation are used, an awkward construction results.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>この本はつまらなくてならない。／This book can’t be anything but boring.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>この本はすごくつまらない。／This book is really boring.</div><div class="explanation">Has essentially the same meaning as てしかたがない. One difference is that てならない is difficult to use with words that do not indicate emotion, feeling, or desire. </div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>赤ちゃんが朝から泣いてならない。／The baby has had to be crying since morning.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>赤ちゃんが朝から泣いてしかたがない。／The baby has been crying his eyes out since morning.</div><div class="explanation">A somewhat old-fashioned expression that is most often used in written language.</div></body></html>