<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>いがい</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0032.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【いか】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0034.xhtml">【いかなる】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x3307">【いがい】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x3309"><span class="number">1. </span>...いがい</h2><h4 class="info">［Nいがい］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-る／V-た　いがい］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>来週</rb><rt>らい しゅう</rt></ruby>のパーティーには、<ruby><rb>山田</rb><rt>やま だ</rt></ruby>さん<ruby><rb>以外</rb><rt>い がい</rt></ruby>みんな<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>くそうです。</span>／<span class="translation">I heard everyone is going to the party next week except Yamada-san. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>これ<ruby><rb>以外</rb><rt>い がい</rt></ruby>で</span>／<span class="translation">にもっといい<ruby><rb>辞書</rb><rt>じ しょ</rt></ruby>はありませんか。／Do you have another dictionary better than this?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>温泉</rb><rt>おん せん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ってのんびりする<ruby><rb>以外</rb><rt>い がい</rt></ruby>にも、<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なに</rt></ruby>かいい<ruby><rb>案</rb><rt>あん</rt></ruby>があったら<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>だ</rt></ruby>してください。</span>／<span class="translation">Please give me any good ideas you have, other than relaxing at a hot spring.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>酔</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>っぱらって<ruby><rb>転</rb><rt>ころ</rt></ruby>んで<ruby><rb>顔</rb><rt>かお</rt></ruby>にけがをした<ruby><rb>以外</rb><rt>い がい</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>今週</rb><rt>こん しゅう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>特</rb><rt>とく</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>変</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>わったこともなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">Besides falling down drunk and bruising my face, there was nothing out of the ordinary that happened this week.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “except” or “besides.”</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x3350"><span class="number">2. </span>...いがいに...ない</h2><h4 class="info">［Nいがいに...ない］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-る／V-た　いがいに...ない］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>以外</rb><rt>い がい</rt></ruby>にこの<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>任</rb><rt>まか</rt></ruby>せられる<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>はいない。</span>／<span class="translation">I can leave this work to no one but her.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>単語</rb><rt>たん ご</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>自分</rb><rt>じ ぶん</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>努力</rb><rt>ど りょく</rt></ruby>して<ruby><rb>覚</rb><rt>おぼ</rt></ruby>える<ruby><rb>以外</rb><rt>い がい</rt></ruby>に、<ruby><rb>習得</rb><rt>しゅう とく</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>方法</rb><rt>ほう ほう</rt></ruby>はない。</span>／<span class="translation">There is no way to acquire new words other than making the effort to memorize them on your own.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>スーパーの<ruby><rb>店員</rb><rt>てん いん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>文句</rb><rt>もん く</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>った<ruby><rb>以外</rb><rt>い がい</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>今日</rb><rt>きょう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>誰</rb><rt>だれ</rt></ruby>とも<ruby><rb>一言</rb><rt>ひと こと</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はな</rt></ruby>さなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">Besides making a complaint to a clerk at the supermarket, I haven’t said a word to anyone today.</span></div><div class="explanation">XいがいにYないmeans “only X is Y.” It is the same as ...のほかに...ない and ...しか...ない.</div></body></html>