<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>いぜん2</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0046.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【いぜん<sub class="variation">1</sub>】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0048.xhtml">【いたって】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x5132">【いぜん<sub class="variation">2</sub>】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x5135"><span class="number">1. </span>いぜん</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>以前</rb><rt>い ぜん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>一度</rb><rt>いち ど</rt></ruby>このホテルに<ruby><rb>泊</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>まったことがある。</span>／<span class="translation">I have stayed at this hotel once before.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>以前</rb><rt>い ぜん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>面影</rb><rt>おも かげ</rt></ruby>はまったくなく、やつれてしまっていた。</span>／<span class="translation">She looked haggard, a mere shadow of her former self. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>以前</rb><rt>い ぜん</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>一度</rb><rt>いち ど</rt></ruby>あなたとはゆっくりお<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はな</rt></ruby>ししたいと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>っていました。</span>／<span class="translation">For a long time I have wanted a chance to talk with you.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>先生</rb><rt>せん せい</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>以前</rb><rt>い ぜん</rt></ruby>にも<ruby><rb>増</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>してお<ruby><rb>元気</rb><rt>げん き</rt></ruby>そうで、とても 70 <ruby><rb>才</rb><rt>さい</rt></ruby>とは<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>えないほどだった。</span>／<span class="translation">The teacher appeared in even better health than before, so I could hardly believe he was seventy years old.</span></div><div class="explanation">In these cases, いぜん means “long before now.” It is a more formal expression than 前 (before). </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x5175"><span class="number">2. </span>Nいぜん〈point in time〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>予定</rb><rt>よ てい</rt></ruby>していたはずの3<ruby><rb>月</rb><rt>がつ</rt></ruby> 31 <ruby><rb>日</rb><rt>にち</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>以前</rb><rt>い ぜん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>引</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby>っ<ruby><rb>越</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>してしまったので、<ruby><rb>連絡</rb><rt>れん らく</rt></ruby>がつかない。</span>／<span class="translation">He moved before the planned date of the 31st of March, so I can’t get in touch with him.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>その<ruby><rb>地方</rb><rt>ち ほう</rt></ruby>では<ruby><rb>先週</rb><rt>せん しゅう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>大地震</rb><rt>だい じ しん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>以前</rb><rt>い ぜん</rt></ruby>にも<ruby><rb>何度</rb><rt>なん ど</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>小</rb><rt>ちい</rt></ruby>さな<ruby><rb>地震</rb><rt>じ しん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>起</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>こっていた。</span>／<span class="translation">In that area, there have been small earthquakes many times before the big quake occurred last week.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>の 20 <ruby><rb>才</rb><rt>さい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>以前</rb><rt>い ぜん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>作品</rb><rt>さく ひん</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>他</rb><rt>ほか</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>画家</rb><rt>が か</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>影響</rb><rt>えい きょう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>強</rb><rt>つよ</rt></ruby>く<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>られる。</span>／<span class="translation">His works before the age of twenty appear to have been strongly influenced by other painters.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>この<ruby><rb>間</rb><rt>あいだ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>捕</rb><rt>つか</rt></ruby>まった<ruby><rb>男</rb><rt>おとこ</rt></ruby>は、それ<ruby><rb>以前</rb><rt>い ぜん</rt></ruby>にも<ruby><rb>何回</rb><rt>なん かい</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>同</rb><rt>おな</rt></ruby>じ<ruby><rb>手口</rb><rt>て ぐち</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>誘拐</rb><rt>ゆう かい</rt></ruby>していたらしい。</span>／<span class="translation">I heard that the man who was arrested the other day had previously used the same trick a number of times to kidnap children.</span></div><div class="explanation">This indicates a point in time earlier than the time indicated by N. </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x5212"><span class="number">3. </span>V-るいぜん</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>二人</rb><rt>ふたり</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>結婚</rb><rt>けっ こん</rt></ruby>する<ruby><rb>以前</rb><rt>い ぜん</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>一緒</rb><rt>いっ しょ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>暮</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>らしていた。</span>／<span class="translation">The two of them were living together before they got married.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>映画</rb><rt>えい が</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>監督</rb><rt>かん とく</rt></ruby>になる<ruby><rb>以前</rb><rt>い ぜん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>画家</rb><rt>が か</rt></ruby>だったらしい。</span>／<span class="translation">I heard he was a painter before he became a movie director.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>家具</rb><rt>か ぐ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>う<ruby><rb>以前</rb><rt>い ぜん</rt></ruby>に、<ruby><rb>引</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby>っ<ruby><rb>越</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>先</rb><rt>さき</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>決</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>めなければ。</span>／<span class="translation">Before buying furniture, I should find a place to live first.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>新</rb><rt>あたら</rt></ruby>しい<ruby><rb>企画</rb><rt>き かく</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>始</rb><rt>はじ</rt></ruby>める<ruby><rb>以前</rb><rt>い ぜん</rt></ruby>に、<ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>までのものをもう<ruby><rb>一度</rb><rt>いち ど</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>見直</rb><rt>み なお</rt></ruby>してみる<ruby><rb>必要</rb><rt>ひつ よう</rt></ruby>もあるのではありませんか。</span>／<span class="translation">Don’t we need to re-examine the previous projects before starting a new one?</span></div><div class="explanation">This means “before a certain event.” It is used to express the time relation between a sequence of events that occur over a long period of time.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>私はいつも寝る以前に日記を書く。／I always write in my diary before bed.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x5261"><span class="number">4. </span>Nいぜん〈stage〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>そんなことは<ruby><rb>常識</rb><rt>じょう しき</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>以前</rb><rt>い ぜん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>問題</rb><rt>もん だい</rt></ruby>だ。<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>らない<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>ほう</rt></ruby>がおかしいのだ。</span>／<span class="translation">That’s a matter of common sense. It is strange not to know about it.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>挨拶</rb><rt>あい さつ</rt></ruby>がきちんとできるかどうかは、<ruby><rb>能力</rb><rt>のう りょく</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>以前</rb><rt>い ぜん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はなし</rt></ruby>だ。いくら<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>ができても<ruby><rb>礼儀</rb><rt>れい ぎ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>らないような<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>はお<ruby><rb>断</rb><rt>ことわ</rt></ruby>りだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Whether or not someone can greet people properly precedes any discussion of ability. No matter how capable someone is, a person who has no manners isn’t needed here. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>受験者</rb><rt>じゅ けん しゃ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>動機</rb><rt>どう き</rt></ruby>や<ruby><rb>目的</rb><rt>もく てき</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>面接</rb><rt>めん せつ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>以前</rb><rt>い ぜん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>段階</rb><rt>だん かい</rt></ruby>での<ruby><rb>調査</rb><rt>ちょう さ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>項目</rb><rt>こうもく</rt></ruby>だ。<ruby><rb>面接</rb><rt>めん せつ</rt></ruby>ではもっとほかのことを<ruby><rb>質問</rb><rt>しつ もん</rt></ruby>するべきだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">The examinees’ motivation and aims should have been asked before the interview stage. We should ask them about other things during the interview.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>まずコンセントを<ruby><rb>差</rb><rt>さ</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>込</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>んでから<ruby><rb>電源</rb><rt>でん げん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>れるという、<ruby><rb>使</rb><rt>つか</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>かた</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>以前</rb><rt>い ぜん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>常識</rb><rt>じょう しき</rt></ruby>さえないような<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>にこの<ruby><rb>機械</rb><rt>き かい</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>任</rb><rt>まか</rt></ruby>せるわけにはいかない。</span>／<span class="translation">I cannot entrust this machine to a person who doesn’t even have the common sense to plug it in and turn it on. </span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses that something hasn’t reached the stage indicated by the preceding noun. Implies that something/someone hasn’t reached the stage that would have been expected under normal circumstances. It is often used to criticize senseless or careless behavior. </div></body></html>