<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>むく</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0965.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【むき】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0967.xhtml">【むけ】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x93865">【むく】</h1><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>学者</rb><rt>がく しゃ</rt></ruby>としてはすぐれているが、<ruby><rb>教師</rb><rt>きょう し</rt></ruby>にはむかない。</span>／<span class="translation">He excels as a scholar but is not suited to being a teacher.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>接</rb><rt>せっ</rt></ruby>する<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>にむいていると<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>う。</span>／<span class="translation">I think I would be suited to a job working with people.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>らない<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>会</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>うのが<ruby><rb>嫌</rb><rt>きら</rt></ruby>いなので、セールスの<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>にはむいていません。</span>／<span class="translation">I don’t like meeting new people and so I’m not suited to working in sales.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>この<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>美智子</rb><rt>み ち こ</rt></ruby>さんみたいにおしゃれな<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>向</rb><rt>む</rt></ruby>いていると<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>うんだけど。</span>／<span class="translation">I think this job would suit someone stylish like Michiko-san. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>向</rb><rt>む</rt></ruby>いた<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>はないでしょうか。</span>／<span class="translation">Isn’t there any job suited to me?</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “has an aptitude.” It can be used in the forms （人）が（仕事）にむく and  （仕事）が（人）にむく. The form むいている is also used. Also, the form NにむいたN when modifying a noun is often used.</div></body></html>