<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>といい</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0516.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【とあって】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0518.xhtml">【といい...といい】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x48694">【といい】</h1><h4 class="info">［N／Na　だといい］</h4><h4 class="info">［A-いといい］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-るといい］</h4><div class="explanation">Formed by combining と1 (Usage 3) with いい. とよい is a slightly more formal form.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x48715"><span class="number">1. </span>V-るといい〈suggestion, recommendation〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>この<ruby><rb>株</rb><rt>かぶ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>うといいですよ。</span>／<span class="translation">It's good to buy this stock now.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>分</rb><rt>わ</rt></ruby>からないときは、この<ruby><rb>辞書</rb><rt>じ しょ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>使</rb><rt>つか</rt></ruby>うといい。</span>／<span class="translation">When you don’t understand, this dictionary is helpful.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>旅行</rb><rt>りょ こう</rt></ruby>には、<ruby><rb>小</rb><rt>ちい</rt></ruby>さいドライヤーを<ruby><rb>持</rb><rt>も</rt></ruby>っていくといい。</span>／<span class="translation">Taking a small blow-dryer on trips is a good idea.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>疲</rb><rt>つか</rt></ruby>れたようだね。<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>急</rb><rt>いそ</rt></ruby>がなくてもいいから、ソファで<ruby><rb>少</rb><rt>すこ</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>寝</rb><rt>ね</rt></ruby>るといい。</span>／<span class="translation">You seem tired. Since this work is not urgent, you should lie down on the sofa for a while.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>疑</rb><rt>うたが</rt></ruby>いたければ<ruby><rb>存分</rb><rt>ぞん ぶん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>疑</rb><rt>うたが</rt></ruby>うといい。</span>／<span class="translation">If you want to doubt me, then go ahead and doubt!</span></div><div class="explanation">Follows the dictionary form of a verb and expresses the notion of encouraging another person to take an action. Depending on the context, it can also be used to express a hands-off attitude, as in (5), which has the sense of “do as you like.” Cannot be used to dissuade someone from taking an action. In such cases, the form V-ないほうがいい is used.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>今買わないといい。／It’s good not to buy it now.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>今買わないほうがいい。／You shouldn't buy it now.</div><div class="explanation">Similar expressions include たらいい and ばいい, but といい implies the encouragement that “generally speaking, doing such-and-such is appropriate.” The form といい cannot be used in interrogative expressions inquiring what one ought to do. In that case, たらいい／ばいい are used instead. When answering such questions, however, it is possible to use not only たらいい／ばいい but also といい. Then たらいい／ばいい convey the meaning that “such-and-such would be sufficient” to obtain a particular result. On the other hand, といい means that “such-and-such is generally an appropriate course of action.”</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>うまくいかない時はどうするといいですか。／What’s good to do when things don't go well?</div><div class="explanation xtalk"><span class="type">（◯）</span><span class="number">A:</span>うまくいかない時はどう｛したら／すれば｝いいですか。／A：When things don't go well, what should I do?</div><div class="explanation xtalk"><span class="type"></span><span class="number">B:</span>山本さんに｛聞いたら／聞ければ／聞くと｝いいですよ。／It would be best to ask Yamamoto-san.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x48820"><span class="number">2. </span>...といい〈wish, desire〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>生</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>まれてくる<ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>が、<ruby><rb>女</rb><rt>おんな</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>子</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>だといいなあ。</span>／<span class="translation">It would be nice if the baby on the way is a little girl.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>学生</rb><rt>がく せい</rt></ruby>がもっと<ruby><rb>積極的</rb><rt>せっ きょく てき</rt></ruby>だといいのだが。</span>／<span class="translation">How I wish the students would take a little more initiative!</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>勉強</rb><rt>べん きょう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>部屋</rb><rt>べ や</rt></ruby>がもっと<ruby><rb>広</rb><rt>ひろ</rt></ruby>いといいのになあ。</span>／<span class="translation">If only this study room were a little more spacious....</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>旅行</rb><rt>りょ こう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>間</rb><rt>あいだ</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>晴天</rb><rt>せい てん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>続</rb><rt>つづ</rt></ruby>くといい。</span>／<span class="translation">Let's hope that the fair weather holds during the trip.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>間</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>合</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>うといいんだけど。</span>／<span class="translation">I hope that he makes it in time, but....</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span>みんながこのことを<ruby><rb>忘</rb><rt>わす</rt></ruby>れていないといいが。</span>／<span class="translation">You would all do well never to forget this.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（7）</span><ruby><rb>学生</rb><rt>がく せい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>自発的</rb><rt>じ はつ てき</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>活動</rb><rt>かつ どう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>今後</rb><rt>こん ご</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>継続</rb><rt>けい ぞく</rt></ruby>されるといい。</span>／<span class="translation">It would be nice to see these voluntary activities by the students continue.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses a desire for something to happen. Often used with が, けど, のに, or （のに）なあ at the end of the sentence. When accompanied by が, けど, or のに, the implication is concern that “such-and-such may not be realized,” or that the present state of affairs does not reflect what is hoped for. Has essentially the same meaning as たらいい and ばいい, and can be substituted with these in almost all cases.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x48875"><span class="number">3. </span>...とよかった（のに）</h2><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><span class="number">A:</span>とても<ruby><rb>楽</rb><rt>たの</rt></ruby>しい<ruby><rb>旅行</rb><rt>りょ こう</rt></ruby>だったわよ。あなたも<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>るとよかったのに。</span>／<span class="translation">It was a very enjoyable trip. It would have been nice if you had come along.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span><ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>けるとよかったんだけど、<ruby><rb>急用</rb><rt>きゅう よう</rt></ruby>ができてしまってね。</span>／<span class="translation">It would have been great to be able to go, but something suddenly came up.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>本当</rb><rt>ほん  とう</rt></ruby>のことを<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ってくれるとよかったのに。</span>／<span class="translation">If only you had told me the truth. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>この<ruby><rb>部屋</rb><rt>へ や</rt></ruby>、もう<ruby><rb>少</rb><rt>すこ</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>日当</rb><rt>ひ あ</rt></ruby>たりがいいとよかったんだが。</span>／<span class="translation">I wish this room could have had a little more sunlight. </span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses a feeling of regret or criticism of the listener, arising from the fact that something did not actually happen or that the present reality is contrary to expectations. This usage takes the forms ばよかった or たらよかった more often than とよかった. The sentence often concludes with expressions such as のに, のだが, or のだけれど. However, のに is not usually used regarding one's own actions.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>僕も行けるとよかったのに。／I should have been able to go, too....</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>僕も行けるとよかったん｛だけど／だが｝。／If only I had been able to go, too....</div></body></html>