<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>いかに</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0034.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【いかなる】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0036.xhtml">【いかにも】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x3516">【いかに】</h1><div class="explanation">Used in written language. In spoken language, どんなに is often used instead of いかに.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x3528"><span class="number">1. </span>いかに...か</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>この<ruby><rb>町</rb><rt>まち</rt></ruby>がいかに<ruby><rb>暮</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>らしやすいかは、<ruby><rb>住</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>んでいる<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>表情</rb><rt>ひょう じょう</rt></ruby>からもうかがわれる。</span>／<span class="translation">You can tell from the inhabitants’ demeanor just how comfortable it is to live in this town.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>この<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>がいかに<ruby><rb>精神的</rb><rt>せい しん てき</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>苦労</rb><rt>く ろう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>多</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>いかが、<ruby><rb>手伝</rb><rt>て つだ</rt></ruby>ってみて<ruby><rb>初</rb><rt>はじ</rt></ruby>めて<ruby><rb>実感</rb><rt>じっ かん</rt></ruby>できた。</span>／<span class="translation">It was only when I started to help with the work that I could actually feel how mentally demanding it was. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>あの<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>がいかにつきあいにくい<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>かおわかりいただけるだろうか。</span>／<span class="translation">Can you understand how difficult it is to get along with that person? </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>愛</rb><rt>あい</rt></ruby>する<ruby><rb>夫</rb><rt>おっと</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>飛行機</rb><rt>ひ こう き</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>事故</rb><rt>じ こ</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>失</rb><rt>うしな</rt></ruby>って、<ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>がいかにつらい<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>いをしているか、<ruby><rb>想像</rb><rt>そう ぞう</rt></ruby>しただけで<ruby><rb>胸</rb><rt>むね</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>痛</rb><rt>いた</rt></ruby>くなる。</span>／<span class="translation">It makes my heart ache just to imagine how much she has been suffering since she lost her husband in an airplane accident.</span></div><div class="explanation">Whenいかに is followed by an adjective, V-やすい, or V-にくい, it means “how much... it is.” It often includes the meaning of an extreme degree. </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x3565"><span class="number">2. </span>いかに...ても</h2><h4 class="info">［いかにN／Na　　でも］</h4><h4 class="info">［いかにA-くても］</h4><h4 class="info">［いかにV-ても］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>いかに<ruby><rb>工夫</rb><rt>く ふう</rt></ruby>をこらしても、<ruby><rb>家族</rb><rt>か ぞく</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>料理</rb><rt>りょう り</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>関心</rb><rt>かん しん</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>示</rb><rt>しめ</rt></ruby>さない。</span>／<span class="translation">My family doesn’t show any interest in my cooking no matter how creative I try to be.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>いかに<ruby><rb>精巧</rb><rt>せい こう</rt></ruby>なコンピュータでも、しょせん<ruby><rb>機械</rb><rt>き かい</rt></ruby>はただの<ruby><rb>機械</rb><rt>き かい</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">No matter how advanced a computer may be, in the end it is just a machine.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>いかに<ruby><rb>歌</rb><rt>うた</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>上手</rb><rt>じょう ず</rt></ruby>でも、<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>をひきつける<ruby><rb>魅力</rb><rt>み りょく</rt></ruby>がなければ<ruby><rb>歌手</rb><rt>か しゅ</rt></ruby>にはなれない。</span>／<span class="translation">No matter how well you sing, you have to have the charm to attract people in order to be a professional singer.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>いかに<ruby><rb>頭</rb><rt>あたま</rt></ruby>がよくても<ruby><rb>体</rb><rt>からだ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>弱</rb><rt>よわ</rt></ruby>くてはこの<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>はつとまらない。</span>／<span class="translation">A person who is in poor health cannot do this work even if he or she is very intelligent.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means どれほど...でも(no matter how...) and strongly emphasizes the statement that follows.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x3608"><span class="number">3. </span>いかに...といっても</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>いかに<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>有能</rb><rt>ゆう のう</rt></ruby>だと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>っても、こんな<ruby><rb>難題</rb><rt>なん だい</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>一人</rb><rt>ひとり</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>処理</rb><rt>しょ り</rt></ruby>することは<ruby><rb>不可能</rb><rt>ふ か のう</rt></ruby>だろう。</span>／<span class="translation">Even if he is capable, it would be impossible to deal with such a difficult problem by himself.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>いかに<ruby><rb>医療</rb><rt>い りょう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>技術</rb><rt>ぎ じゅつ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>進</rb><rt>すす</rt></ruby>んだと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>っても、<ruby><rb>治療</rb><rt>ち りょう</rt></ruby>して<ruby><rb>必</rb><rt>かなら</rt></ruby>ず<ruby><rb>快復</rb><rt>かい ふく</rt></ruby>するとは<ruby><rb>限</rb><rt>かぎ</rt></ruby>らない。</span>／<span class="translation">No matter how much medical technology has progressed, not every patient recovers after treatment.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>いかに<ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>多忙</rb><rt>た ぼう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>極</rb><rt>きわ</rt></ruby>めていると<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>っても、<ruby><rb>電話</rb><rt>でん わ</rt></ruby>1<ruby><rb>本</rb><rt>ぽん</rt></ruby>をかける<ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby>もないということはないだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">No matter how busy she is, that doesn’t mean she hasn’t got the time to make a single phone call.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “I recognize such-and-such as a fact, but still....” The second half of the sentence indicates a contradiction with the first half. Used to emphasize the intent of the second clause even after acknowledging the thing stated in the first.  </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x3639"><span class="number">4. </span>いかに...とはいえ</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>いかに<ruby><rb>家賃</rb><rt>や ちん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>高</rb><rt>たか</rt></ruby>いとはいえ、こんなに<ruby><rb>環境</rb><rt>かん きょう</rt></ruby>がいいのなら<ruby><rb>納得</rb><rt>なっ とく</rt></ruby>できるのではないか。</span>／<span class="translation">However high the rent is, wouldn’t you say the great surroundings mean that it’s to be expected?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>いかに<ruby><rb>才能</rb><rt>さい のう</rt></ruby>のある<ruby><rb>芸術家</rb><rt>げい じゅつ か</rt></ruby>であるとはいえ、こんなに<ruby><rb>難解</rb><rt>なん かい</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>作品</rb><rt>さく ひん</rt></ruby>ばかりでは<ruby><rb>一般</rb><rt>いっ ぱん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>理解</rb><rt>り かい</rt></ruby>してはもらえないだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">However talented an artist he is, with only such esoteric works as these it must be hard for the general public to understand them. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>いかに<ruby><rb>国全体</rb><rt>くに ぜん たい</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>豊</rb><rt>ゆた</rt></ruby>かになってきたとはいえ、まだまだ<ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>生活</rb><rt>せい かつ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>水準</rb><rt>すいじゅん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>満足</rb><rt>まん ぞく</rt></ruby>していない<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>多</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>いのである。</span>／<span class="translation">However wealthy the whole nation is becoming, there are still many people who are not satisfied at all with their present standard of living. </span></div><div class="explanation">Same as いかに...といっても. More of a literary expression.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x3670"><span class="number">5. </span>いかに...ようと（も）</h2><h4 class="info">［いかに修飾句+Nであろうと（も）］</h4><h4 class="info">［いかにNa であろうと（も）］</h4><h4 class="info">［いかにA-かろうと（も）］</h4><h4 class="info">［いかにV-ようと（も）］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>いかに<ruby><rb>便利</rb><rt>べん り</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>機械</rb><rt>き かい</rt></ruby>であろうと、それを<ruby><rb>使</rb><rt>つか</rt></ruby>うことによって<ruby><rb>手</rb><rt>て</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>作</rb><rt>つく</rt></ruby>る<ruby><rb>喜</rb><rt>よろこ</rt></ruby>びが<ruby><rb>失</rb><rt>うしな</rt></ruby>われてしまうのだとしたら、<ruby><rb>使</rb><rt>つか</rt></ruby>う<ruby><rb>意味</rb><rt>い み</rt></ruby>はない。</span>／<span class="translation">However convenient this machine is, there is no sense in using it if it takes away the joy of creating something by hand.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>いかに<ruby><rb>困難</rb><rt>こん なん</rt></ruby>であろうと、やってみれば<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>らかの<ruby><rb>解決策</rb><rt>かい けつ さく</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>えてくるはずだ。</span>／<span class="translation">No matter how daunting it is, if we give it a try some sort of solution is bound to appear.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>いかにスポーツで<ruby><rb>体</rb><rt>からだ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>鍛</rb><rt>きた</rt></ruby>えようと、<ruby><rb>栄養</rb><rt>えい よう</rt></ruby>のバランスが<ruby><rb>取</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>れていなければ<ruby><rb>健康</rb><rt>けん こう</rt></ruby>にはなれない。</span>／<span class="translation">No matter how fit he gets by playing sports, he won’t be healthy without maintaining a nutritionally balanced diet.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>いかに<ruby><rb>環境保護</rb><rt>かん きょう ほ ご </rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>努</rb><rt>つと</rt></ruby>めようと、ゴルフ<ruby><rb>場</rb><rt>じょう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>作</rb><rt>つく</rt></ruby>られてしまえば<ruby><rb>終</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>わりだ。</span>／<span class="translation">No matter how hard we try to protect the environment, it will come to nothing if the golf course is built.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>いかにみんなにほめられようと、しょせん<ruby><rb>素人</rb><rt>しろうと</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>作品</rb><rt>さく ひん</rt></ruby>じゃないか。それにこんな<ruby><rb>値段</rb><rt>ね だん</rt></ruby>つけるなんて<ruby><rb>信</rb><rt>しん</rt></ruby>じられないよ。</span>／<span class="translation">No matter how much everyone praises it, it’s just the work of an amateur. I can’t believe it has been priced so high.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span>いかに<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>苦</rb><rt>くる</rt></ruby>しかろうとも<ruby><rb>決</rb><rt>けっ</rt></ruby>して<ruby><rb>文句</rb><rt>もん く</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>わない。</span>／<span class="translation">No matter how demanding his work is, he never complains.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means the same as いかに...ても, but is a rather literary expression.</div></body></html>