<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ないか</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0644.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【どんなに】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0646.xhtml">【ないかしら】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x59871">【ないか】</h1><div class="explanation">...ないか is used mainly by male speakers. However, ...ない？, which is an abbreviated form of polite expressions such as ...ませんか and か, is used by both male and female speakers.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x59886"><span class="number">1. </span>V-ない（か）〈invitation〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>ちょっと、<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べてみない？</span>／<span class="translation">Want to try some of this?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>今度</rb><rt>こん ど</rt></ruby>、いっしょにスキーに<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>かないか。</span>／<span class="translation">Why don’t we go skiing sometime?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>そろそろお<ruby><rb>茶</rb><rt>ちゃ</rt></ruby>にしませんか。</span>／<span class="translation">How about taking a break for tea pretty soon?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>ちょっと<ruby><rb>寄</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>っていきません？</span>／<span class="translation">Would you like to drop by there?</span></div><div class="explanation">When combined with verbs expressing a volitional action, the pattern V-ない(か) is used to suggest that an interlocutor take some action or to invite <span class="noSeparate">him/her</span> to do something together. The polite form of V-ない(か) is V-ませんか. V-ない(か) forms are usually pronounced with rising intonation, and か can be omitted.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x59926"><span class="number">2. </span>V-てくれない（か）〈request〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>お<ruby><rb>塩</rb><rt>しお</rt></ruby>、とってくれない？</span>／<span class="translation">Can you pass me the salt?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>ちょっと<ruby><rb>手伝</rb><rt>て つだ</rt></ruby>ってくれませんか。</span>／<span class="translation">Would you help me for a moment?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>この<ruby><rb>本</rb><rt>ほん</rt></ruby>、2、3<ruby><rb>日</rb><rt>にち</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>貸</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>してもらえない？</span>／<span class="translation">Can I borrow this book for a few days?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>5<ruby><rb>時</rb><rt>じ</rt></ruby>までにおいでくださいませんか。</span>／<span class="translation">Would it be possible for you to be here by five o’clock?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>明日</rb><rt>あ す</rt></ruby>もう<ruby><rb>一度</rb><rt>いち ど</rt></ruby>ご<ruby><rb>来店</rb><rt>らい てん</rt></ruby>いただけないでしょうか。</span>／<span class="translation">Could you come to our shop again tomorrow?</span></div><div class="explanation">This pattern, used in the forms V-てくれないか and V-てもらえないか, expresses a request from a speaker to an interlocutor. It is more polite when used in forms such as V-てくださいませんか／いただけませんか／いただけませんでしょうか or お／ご...くださいませんか, as in (4), and お／ご...いただけないでしょうか, as in (5).</div><div class="explanation">Note that when this pattern is used with もらう and いただく, the potential forms もらえる and いただける should be negated to create the forms V-てもらえないか／いただけないか. Also, when いただく and くださる are attached to honorific expressions such as おいでになる (to come/to be here) or Sino-Japanese verbs such as 来店する (to come to a shop), になって and して are usually omitted and the forms おいでいただけませんか／くださいませんか and ご来店いただけませんか／くださいませんか are used.</div><div class="explanation">V-てくれないか forms are often pronounced with a rising intonation, and か can be omitted. In polite language, these forms can also be replaced by ...願えないか (lit. “can’t/couldn’t I ask...?”), as shown below.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>もう一度ご来店願えないでしょうか。／Could we ask you to come to our shop again?</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x60001"><span class="number">3. </span>V-ないか〈imperative〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>おい、<ruby><rb>待</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>たないか。</span>／<span class="translation">Hey, can’t you wait?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>だまらないか。</span>／<span class="translation">Can’t you shut up?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>いい<ruby><rb>加減</rb><rt>か げん</rt></ruby>でやめないか。</span>／<span class="translation">It’s about time you stopped.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>早</rb><rt>はや</rt></ruby>く<ruby><rb>起</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>きないか。</span>／<span class="translation">Why don’t you get up now?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>さっさと<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>かけないか。</span>／<span class="translation">Why don’t you hurry up and get going?</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to order an interlocutor to take action immediately when <span class="noSeparate">s/he</span> does not seem to be doing so. For instance, (1) means “Wait!” and (2) “Shut up.”</div><div class="explanation">These expressions are similar to imperatives. However, because they are used in situations where an interlocutor is reluctant to take immediate action, they often convey the sense that the speaker is irritated or upset. V-ないか is pronounced with falling intonation in a demanding tone and does not have a polite form. It is used by male speakers.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x60057"><span class="number">4. </span>...ない（か）〈confirmation〉</h2><h4 class="info">［N／Na　ではないか］</h4><h4 class="info">［A-くないか］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-ないか］</h4><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>犯人</rb><rt>はん にん</rt></ruby>じゃないですか。</span>／<span class="translation">Isn’t he guilty?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>そうかな。</span>／<span class="translation">We’ll see.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>無理</rb><rt>む り</rt></ruby>じゃないですか。</span>／<span class="translation">Isn’t this impossible for a child?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span><ruby><rb>大丈夫</rb><rt>だい じょう ぶ</rt></ruby>ですよ。</span>／<span class="translation">It should be all right.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>君</rb><rt>きみ</rt></ruby>にはちょっと<ruby><rb>難</rb><rt>むずか</rt></ruby>しくない？</span>／<span class="translation">Isn’t this a bit difficult for you?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>ええ、でもやってみます。</span>／<span class="translation">Yes, but I’ll try.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><span class="number">A:</span>この<ruby><rb>部屋</rb><rt>へ や</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>変</rb><rt>へん</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>匂</rb><rt>にお</rt></ruby>いがしない？</span>／<span class="translation">Doesn’t this room smell strange?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>うん、なんだかちょっと。</span>／<span class="translation">Yeah, a bit....</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><span class="number">A:</span>ちょっと<ruby><rb>駅</rb><rt>えき</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>遠</rb><rt>とお</rt></ruby>すぎませんか。</span>／<span class="translation">Isn’t it a little too far from the station?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>そうですか。<ruby><rb>歩</rb><rt>ある</rt></ruby>いて 15 <ruby><rb>分</rb><rt>ふん</rt></ruby>ぐらいですけど。</span>／<span class="translation">Do you think so? But it’s only about a fifteen-minute walk.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>様子</rb><rt>よう す</rt></ruby>、ちょっと<ruby><rb>変</rb><rt>へん</rt></ruby>だと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>いませんか。</span>／<span class="translation">Don’t you think something about him looks a bit strange?</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to ask the listener to confirm whether or not what the speaker is thinking is correct. Even though this pattern takes negative forms such as Xじゃないか (isn’t it X?), what the speaker wants to confirm is a positive state of affairs, Xである (it is X). When the listener agrees with what the speaker says, <span class="noSeparate">s/he</span> responds with はい／うん、そうだ, and when the listener disagrees, <span class="noSeparate">s/he</span> uses いいえ／いや、そうではない. When the speaker wants to confirm an event that has apparently already taken place, <span class="noSeparate">s/he</span> uses the <i>ta</i>-form, as below.</div><div class="explanation xtalk"><span class="type">（例）</span><span class="number">A:</span>何か物音がしなかったか。／Didn’t you hear a noise? </div><div class="explanation xtalk"><span class="type"></span><span class="number">B:</span>いや、僕には何も聞こえなかったけど。／No, I didn’t hear anything.</div><div class="explanation xtalk"><span class="type">（例）</span><span class="number">A:</span>私に電話かかって来ませんでしたか。／Wasn’t there a phone call for me?</div><div class="explanation xtalk"><span class="type"></span><span class="number">B:</span>いいえ。／No, there wasn’t.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x60224"><span class="number">5. </span>...ない（か）〈mild assertion〉</h2><h4 class="info">［N／Na　ではないか］</h4><h4 class="info">［A-くないか］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-ないか］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>が、<ruby><rb>東大</rb><rt>とう だい</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>合格</rb><rt>ごう かく</rt></ruby>したなんて<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なに</rt></ruby>かの<ruby><rb>間違</rb><rt>ま ちが</rt></ruby>いではないか。</span>／<span class="translation">Wasn’t it some kind of mistake that he passed the entrance exam for Tokyo University?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>最近</rb><rt>さい きん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>言動</rb><rt>げん どう</rt></ruby>はちょっと<ruby><rb>変</rb><rt>へん</rt></ruby>じゃないか。</span>／<span class="translation">Don’t you think that lately he’s been behaving a little strangely?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>このスープ、ちょっと、<ruby><rb>塩味</rb><rt>しお あじ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>薄</rb><rt>うす</rt></ruby>くない？</span>／<span class="translation">Doesn’t this soup need a little more salt?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>やめといたほうがよくないか。</span>／<span class="translation">Wouldn’t it be better if you just let it drop?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>そんなに<ruby><rb>働</rb><rt>はたら</rt></ruby>いたら<ruby><rb>病気</rb><rt>びょう き</rt></ruby>にならないか。</span>／<span class="translation">Don’t you think that working so hard will make you sick?</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to make a mild assertion of personal opinion. Conveys the speaker’s feeling that “I think this might be so” and is used to make an inconclusive statement that leaves room for a little doubt. As shown in (5), the use of ...ないか often implies the speaker’s anxiety or concern.</div><div class="explanation">...ないか is often replaced by expressions implying conjecture or doubt, such as (の)ではないか, (の)ではないだろうか／(の)ではなかろうか／(の)ではあるまいか or ないかしら／ないかな. When talking about a past event, (では)なかったか is used, as illustrated below.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>昨日見かけた人、山田さんの奥さんじゃなかったか。／Wasn’t the person we saw yesterday Yamada-san’s wife?</div><div class="explanation">In spoken Japanese, when ...ではないか attaches to a noun or a <i>na</i>-adjective it is usually replaced by じゃないか.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x60305"><span class="number">6. </span>...じゃないか<span class="reference">→<a href="part0276.xhtml#idtitlex1x21701">【じゃないか<sub class="Subscript">1</sub>】</a>、<a href="part0277.xhtml#idtitlex1x21838">【じゃないか<sub class="Subscript">2</sub>】</a></span></h2><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x60316"><span class="number">7. </span>...ではないか<span class="reference">→<a href="part0484.xhtml#idtitlex1x43736">【ではないか<sub class="Subscript">1</sub>】</a>、<a href="part0485.xhtml#idtitlex1x44039">【ではないか<sub class="Subscript">2</sub>】</a></span></h2></body></html>