<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ともあろうものが</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0625.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ども<sub class="variation">2</sub>】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0627.xhtml">【ともいうべき】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x59053">【ともあろうものが】</h1><h4 class="info">［Nともあろうものが］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>大蔵</rb><rt>おおくら</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>官僚</rb><rt>かん りょう</rt></ruby>ともあろうものが、<ruby><rb>賄賂</rb><rt>わい ろ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>受</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>け<ruby><rb>取</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>るとは<ruby><rb>驚</rb><rt>おどろ</rt></ruby>いた。</span>／<span class="translation">It is shocking to know that even an official of the Ministry of Finance took a bribe.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>警察官</rb><rt>けい さつ かん</rt></ruby>ともあろうものが、<ruby><rb>強盗</rb><rt>ごう とう</rt></ruby>をはたらくとは<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>ということだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">It is astounding that a police officer, of all people, committed burglary.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>母親</rb><rt>はは おや</rt></ruby>ともあろうものが、<ruby><rb>生</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>まれた<ruby><rb>自分</rb><rt>じ ぶん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>をゴミ<ruby><rb>箱</rb><rt>ばこ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>捨</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>てるとは、まったく<ruby><rb>恐</rb><rt>おそ</rt></ruby>ろしい<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はなし</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">It is absolutely terrifying that a mother would dump her own new-born in a garbage can.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “such a (competent, honorable, etc.) person (does something unexpectedly).” Placed after a noun indicating social status, role or occupation, it is used to describe an action that, according to conventional wisdom, a person in such a role should not have performed. ともあろうものが is followed by an expression that conveys surprise, anger, or suspicion. もの can be replaced by other words that refer to people, such as 人 (person) or 人物 (person/figure).</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>国会議員ともあろう人物がこのような巨額の脱税を平気で行うのだから、議員のモラルも低下したものである。／The professional morals of politicians have really deteriorated when a member of the Diet, of all people, thinks nothing of evading such an enormous amount of tax.</div></body></html>