<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>けれど</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0202.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【けど】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0204.xhtml">【けれども】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x16167">【けれど】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x16169"><span class="number">1. </span>けれど</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>2<ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>待</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>った。けれど、<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>姿</rb><rt>すがた</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>現</rb><rt>あらわ</rt></ruby>さなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">I waited for two hours. However, he did not show up. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>パーティーではだれも<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>っている<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>がいなかった。けれど、みんな<ruby><rb>親切</rb><rt>しん せつ</rt></ruby>でとても<ruby><rb>楽</rb><rt>たの</rt></ruby>しかった。</span>／<span class="translation">There was no one I knew at the party. However, everybody was nice and I had a really good time. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>この<ruby><rb>作品</rb><rt>さく ひん</rt></ruby>で3<ruby><rb>等賞</rb><rt>とう しょう</rt></ruby>ぐらいとれるかなと<ruby><rb>期待</rb><rt>き たい</rt></ruby>していた。けれど、<ruby><rb>結果</rb><rt>けっ か</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>いがけなく1<ruby><rb>等賞</rb><rt>とう しょう</rt></ruby>だった。</span>／<span class="translation">I was hoping I might win third prize with this piece. But, to my surprise, the result was first prize. </span></div><div class="explanation">Placed at the beginning of a sentence, けれど indicates that what comes next will develop in a way that differs from what might be expected from the preceding sentence(s). Compared with しかし, けれど is used more often in spoken language. However, it can be used in informal writing too.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x16200"><span class="number">2. </span>...けれど</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>2<ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>待</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>ったけれど、<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>姿</rb><rt>すがた</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>現</rb><rt>あらわ</rt></ruby>さなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">I waited for two hours, but he did not show up. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>あの<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>はきれいだけれど、<ruby><rb>意地悪</rb><rt>い じ わる</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">That woman is beautiful but ill-natured. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>下手</rb><rt>へ た</rt></ruby>だけれど、ピアノを<ruby><rb>弾</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby>くのは<ruby><rb>楽</rb><rt>たの</rt></ruby>しい。</span>／<span class="translation">I’m not good at it, but playing the piano is fun. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>野球</rb><rt>や きゅう</rt></ruby>もおもしろいけれどサッカーはもっとおもしろいと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>う<ruby><rb>若</rb><rt>わか</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>増</rb><rt>ふ</rt></ruby>えている。</span>／<span class="translation">More and more young people are starting to think that, although baseball is fun, soccer is even more fun.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>係長</rb><rt>かかり ちょう</rt></ruby>はもうすぐ<ruby><rb>帰</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>ると<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>いますけれど、ここでお<ruby><rb>待</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>ちになりますか。</span>／<span class="translation">I’m sure the subsection chief will be back soon...would you like to wait here? </span></div><div class="explanation">Attaches to the end of a clause and signals that what comes next will develop in a way that is different from what might be anticipated from the statement in the preceding clause. It is an adversative expression, but not necessarily limited to adversative use. It can also be used to make a preliminary remark, as in (5). Tends to be used in spoken language, but may also be used in informal writing.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x16243"><span class="number">3. </span>...けれど</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>いま<ruby><rb>母</rb><rt>はは</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>留守</rb><rt>る す</rt></ruby>なんですけれど。</span>／<span class="translation">My mother isn’t home right now....</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>来週</rb><rt>らい しゅう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>外国</rb><rt>がい こく</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>出張</rb><rt>しゅっ ちょう</rt></ruby>で、いないんですけれど。</span>／<span class="translation">I’m afraid I have an overseas business trip next week, so I won’t be here....</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>紅茶</rb><rt>こう ちゃ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>切</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>らしています。コーヒーならありますけれど。</span>／<span class="translation">We’ve run out of tea. We do have coffee, though.... </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>ちょっとコピー<ruby><rb>機</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>動</rb><rt>うご</rt></ruby>かないんですけれど。</span>／<span class="translation">Excuse me, but the copy machine isn’t working....</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>書類</rb><rt>しょ るい</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>一枚</rb><rt>いち まい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>足</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>りないんですけれど。</span>／<span class="translation">A page of the document seems to be missing....</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span>かあさん、<ruby><rb>友達</rb><rt>とも だち</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>夏休</rb><rt>なつ やす</rt></ruby>みにうちへ<ruby><rb>泊</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>まりに<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>たいって<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ってるんだけれど。</span>／<span class="translation">Mom, a friend of mine says she wants to come and stay at our house during the summer break....</span></div><div class="explanation">Placed at the end of a sentence, ...けれど creates the impression that the sentence is unfinished. Used to state an excuse, an explanation of circumstances, etc. in a soft and gentle manner. Also used to make indirect requests, as in (4), (5), and (6). Can be attached to both polite and plain forms. When attached to polite forms, it makes the expression more feminine and polite. Spoken language.</div></body></html>