<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ていはしまいか</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0449.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ていただく】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0451.xhtml">【ている】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x39976">【ていはしまいか】</h1><h4 class="info">［V-ていはしまいか］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>環境保護</rb><rt>かん きょう ほ ご </rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>運動</rb><rt>うん どう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>盛</rb><rt>さか</rt></ruby>んになってきたが、<ruby><rb>本質的</rb><rt>ほん しつ てき</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>問題</rb><rt>もん だい</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>忘</rb><rt>わす</rt></ruby>れていはしまいか。</span>／<span class="translation">There’s a lot of action on behalf of protecting the environment, but I wonder if people have forgotten the basic issues.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>娘</rb><rt>むすめ</rt></ruby>はひとりで<ruby><rb>旅行</rb><rt>りょ こう</rt></ruby>にでかけたが、<ruby><rb>今頃</rb><rt>いま ごろ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>言葉</rb><rt>こと ば</rt></ruby>のわからない<ruby><rb>外国</rb><rt>がい こく</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>苦労</rb><rt>く ろう</rt></ruby>していはしまいかと<ruby><rb>気</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>になる。</span>／<span class="translation">My daughter went on a trip by herself, and I’m worried that she might be having trouble now in a country where she doesn’t know the language.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>幼</rb><rt>おさな</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>両親</rb><rt>りょう しん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>家</rb><rt>いえ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>預</rb><rt>あず</rt></ruby>けてきたが、<ruby><rb>寂</rb><rt>さび</rt></ruby>しくなって<ruby><rb>泣</rb><rt>な</rt></ruby>いていはしまいかと<ruby><rb>心配</rb><rt>しん ぱい</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">I left my young children at my parents’, but I’m worried they might be feeling lonely and crying.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>はじめて<ruby><rb>報告</rb><rt>ほう こく</rt></ruby>レポートを<ruby><rb>書</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>いたときは<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>わぬ<ruby><rb>間違</rb><rt>ま ちが</rt></ruby>いをしていはしまいかと、<ruby><rb>何度</rb><rt>なん ど</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>見直</rb><rt>み なお</rt></ruby>したものである。</span>／<span class="translation">When I first wrote a report, I kept checking it, thinking I might have made an unexpected mistake.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>自分</rb><rt>じ ぶん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>書</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>いた<ruby><rb>批評</rb><rt>ひ ひょう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>をおこらせていはしまいかと、おそるおそる<ruby><rb>挨拶</rb><rt>あい さつ</rt></ruby>した。</span>／<span class="translation">He greeted her with great hesitation, thinking that the review he had written might have angered her.</span></div><div class="explanation">まい is a written expression for indicating negative supposition, and しまい is equivalent to しないだろう. The sentence as whole is more or less the same as ていないだろうか. For example, (2) expresses that the speaker thinks that his daughter is probably having a hard time abroad.</div></body></html>