<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>にかんして</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0766.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【にかわる】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0768.xhtml">【にかんする】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x70775">【にかんして】</h1><h4 class="info">［Nにかんして］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>その<ruby><rb>事件</rb><rt>じ けん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>関</rb><rt>かん</rt></ruby>して<ruby><rb>学校</rb><rt>がっ こう</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>報告</rb><rt>ほう こく</rt></ruby>があった。</span>／<span class="translation">We received a report on the incident from school.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>地震</rb><rt>じ しん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>災害</rb><rt>さい がい</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>関</rb><rt>かん</rt></ruby>しては、<ruby><rb>我</rb><rt>わ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>国</rb><rt>くに</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>多</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>くの<ruby><rb>経験</rb><rt>けい けん</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>知識</rb><rt>ち しき</rt></ruby>をもっている。</span>／<span class="translation">With regard to the disaster caused by earthquakes, our country has considerable experience and knowledge.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>その<ruby><rb>問題</rb><rt>もん だい</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>関</rb><rt>かん</rt></ruby>して<ruby><rb>質問</rb><rt>しつ もん</rt></ruby>したいことがある。</span>／<span class="translation">I have a question to ask concerning this matter.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>地質学</rb><rt>ち しつ がく</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>関</rb><rt>かん</rt></ruby>しての<ruby><rb>本</rb><rt>ほん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>読</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>んでいる。</span>／<span class="translation">I’m reading a book on geology.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>その<ruby><rb>事件</rb><rt>じ けん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>関</rb><rt>かん</rt></ruby>しての<ruby><rb>報告</rb><rt>ほう こく</rt></ruby>はまだ<ruby><rb>受</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>けていない。</span>／<span class="translation">I haven’t received any report of the incident yet.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span>コンピュータに<ruby><rb>関</rb><rt>かん</rt></ruby>する<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>知識</rb><rt>ち しき</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>相当</rb><rt>そう とう</rt></ruby>なものだ。</span>／<span class="translation">His knowledge concerning computers is considerable.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（7）</span><ruby><rb>地質</rb><rt>ち しつ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>調査</rb><rt>ちょう さ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>関</rb><rt>かん</rt></ruby>する<ruby><rb>報告</rb><rt>ほう こく</rt></ruby>をするように<ruby><rb>求</rb><rt>もと</rt></ruby>められた。</span>／<span class="translation">I was asked to report on the geological survey.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses the meaning of “concerning something” or “as to something.” Becomes Nに関してのN or NにかんするN, as shown in (4)-(7), when it modifies a noun. A little more formal than について.</div></body></html>