<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>それだけ</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0341.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【それこそ】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0343.xhtml">【それで】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x26967">【それだけ】</h1><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>1<ruby><rb>年間</rb><rt>ねん かん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>努力</rb><rt>ど りょく</rt></ruby>して<ruby><rb>合格</rb><rt>ごう かく</rt></ruby>したのでそれだけ<ruby><rb>喜</rb><rt>よろこ</rt></ruby>びも<ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>きい。</span>／<span class="translation">I passed after a year of hard work, so my happiness is all the greater.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>よく<ruby><rb>働</rb><rt>はたら</rt></ruby>いたらそれだけおなかもすく。</span>／<span class="translation">The more you work, the hungrier you get.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>あの<ruby><rb>仲</rb><rt>なか</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>良</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>かったふたりはとうとう<ruby><rb>別</rb><rt>わか</rt></ruby>れてしまった。<ruby><rb>愛</rb><rt>あい</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>合</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>っていたからそれだけ<ruby><rb>憎</rb><rt>にく</rt></ruby>しみも<ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>きいようだ。</span>／<span class="translation">That couple who had been so close ended up splitting up. They’d really loved each other, so it seems like their hatred is that much bigger.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>練習</rb><rt>れん しゅう</rt></ruby>を1<ruby><rb>日</rb><rt>にち</rt></ruby>でもさぼるとそれだけ<ruby><rb>体</rb><rt>からだ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>動</rb><rt>うご</rt></ruby>かなくなる。</span>／<span class="translation">If you skip practice for even just one day, your body will move that much less.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “proportionate to a certain extent.”</div></body></html>