<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>にはおよばない</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0821.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【にはあたらない】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0823.xhtml">【にはんし】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x73671">【にはおよばない】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x73673"><span class="number">1. </span>...にはおよばない</h2><h4 class="info">［Nにはおよばない］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-るにはおよばない］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>検査</rb><rt>けん さ</rt></ruby>では<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なに</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>異常</rb><rt>い じょう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>つかりませんでした。すっかり<ruby><rb>元気</rb><rt>げん き</rt></ruby>になりましたから、ご<ruby><rb>心配</rb><rt>しん ぱい</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>及</rb><rt>およ</rt></ruby>びません。</span>／<span class="translation">Nothing abnormal was found in the examination. I’m completely recovered, so you don’t need to worry. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>分</rb><rt>わ</rt></ruby>かりきったことだから、わざわざ<ruby><rb>説明</rb><rt>せつ めい</rt></ruby>するには<ruby><rb>及</rb><rt>およ</rt></ruby>ばない。</span>／<span class="translation">This is an obvious matter, so you don’t need to explain.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>こんな<ruby><rb>遠</rb><rt>とお</rt></ruby>くまで、はるばるお<ruby><rb>越</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>しいただくには<ruby><rb>及</rb><rt>およ</rt></ruby>びません。</span>／<span class="translation">Please do not bother to come all the way to such a distant place. </span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses the meaning of “it is not necessary to do something” or “there is no need to do something.” Can be rephrased as ...にはあたらない.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x73708"><span class="number">2. </span>それにはおよばない</h2><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>車</rb><rt>くるま</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>家</rb><rt>いえ</rt></ruby>までお<ruby><rb>送</rb><rt>おく</rt></ruby>りしましょう。</span>／<span class="translation">Let me drive you home.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>いいえ、それには<ruby><rb>及</rb><rt>およ</rt></ruby>びません。<ruby><rb>歩</rb><rt>ある</rt></ruby>いても5<ruby><rb>分</rb><rt>ふん</rt></ruby>ほどの<ruby><rb>所</rb><rt>ところ</rt></ruby>ですから、どうぞご<ruby><rb>心配</rb><rt>しん ぱい</rt></ruby>なく。</span>／<span class="translation">No, please don’t bother. It takes me only five minutes or so on foot, so don’t worry.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>空港</rb><rt>くう こう</rt></ruby>までお<ruby><rb>迎</rb><rt>むか</rt></ruby>えにあがりますよ。</span>／<span class="translation">I’ll pick you up at the airport.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span><ruby><rb>大丈夫</rb><rt>だい じょう ぶ</rt></ruby>です。よく<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>っている<ruby><rb>所</rb><rt>ところ</rt></ruby>ですから、それには<ruby><rb>及</rb><rt>およ</rt></ruby>びませんよ。</span>／<span class="translation">I’ll be fine. I know the place well, so please don’t bother.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to decline an offer made by the listener and means “you don’t need to go to such an extent.” Implies the speaker’s acknowledgement of the listener’s consideration, and sounds more formal than その必要はありません.</div></body></html>