<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>て</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0438.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【つれて】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0440.xhtml">【て...て】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x38680">【て】</h1><h4 class="info">［N／Na　で］</h4><h4 class="info">［A-くて］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-て］</h4><div class="explanation">で is attached to nouns and <i>na</i>-adjectives. In the case of <i>i</i>-adjectives, it takes the form くて. ない has two forms: なくて and ないで. In the case of verbs, で is used for those whose dictionary form ends in グ, ヌ, ブ and ム, while all others take て.</div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>朝</rb><rt>あさ</rt></ruby>ご<ruby><rb>飯</rb><rt>はん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>作</rb><rt>つく</rt></ruby>って、<ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>起</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>こした。</span>／<span class="translation">I cooked breakfast and then woke my children up. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>しっかり<ruby><rb>安全</rb><rt>あん ぜん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>点検</rb><rt>てん けん</rt></ruby>して、それからかぎをかけた。</span>／<span class="translation">I checked that everything was safe and then locked up.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>まず、<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>物</rb><rt>もの</rt></ruby>をして、それから、<ruby><rb>映画</rb><rt>えい が</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>て、<ruby><rb>帰</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>って<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>た。</span>／<span class="translation">I went shopping first, then watched a film, and then came home.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>電話</rb><rt>でん わ</rt></ruby>をかけて、<ruby><rb>面会</rb><rt>めん かい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>約束</rb><rt>やく そく</rt></ruby>をとりつけて、<ruby><rb>会</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>いに<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>った。</span>／<span class="translation">I called them, made an appointment for an interview, and then went to see them.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>山田</rb><rt>やま だ</rt></ruby>さんがやめて、<ruby><rb>高田</rb><rt>たか だ</rt></ruby>さんが<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>はい</rt></ruby>った。</span>／<span class="translation">Yamada-san quit, and then Takada-san joined.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span>びっくりして、<ruby><rb>口</rb><rt>くち</rt></ruby>もきけなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">I was so surprised that I couldn’t speak.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（7）</span><ruby><rb>着物</rb><rt>き もの</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>着</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>て、<ruby><rb>出掛</rb><rt>で か</rt></ruby>けた。</span>／<span class="translation">I put on a <i>kimono</i> and went out.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（8）</span><ruby><rb>地下鉄</rb><rt>ち か てつ</rt></ruby>ははやくて<ruby><rb>安全</rb><rt>あん ぜん</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">The subway is fast and safe.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（9）</span><ruby><rb>外</rb><rt>そと</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>真</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>っ<ruby><rb>暗</rb><rt>くら</rt></ruby>でこわかった。</span>／<span class="translation">Outside was dark and scary.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（10）</span>めずらしい<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>手紙</rb><rt>て がみ</rt></ruby>をもらってうれしかった。</span>／<span class="translation">I was happy to receive a letter from someone who rarely writes me.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used for loosely linking two clauses. ...て can be used twice, as in (3) and (4).</div><div class="explanation">By linking sentences which express actions, this describes matters that take place in sequence, as in (1) and (2). Also used to express contrast, a possible reason, a means of action, or circumstances related to such, depending on the context.</div><div class="explanation">In sentences expressing an attribute or state by the use of adjectives, this is sometimes used to list two attributes or to mention a possible reason. When an adjectival clause or description of a characteristic follows an expression of activity, as in (10), it often expresses a possible reason for something.</div><div class="explanation">When several actions or situations alternate, or when one is describing something unrelated to a time sequence, たりis used instead of て.</div></body></html>