<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>にもとづいて</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0833.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【にもとづいた】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0835.xhtml">【にもなく】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x74489">【にもとづいて】</h1><h4 class="info">［Nにもとづいて］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>実際</rb><rt>じっ さい</rt></ruby>にあった<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はなし</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>基</rb><rt>もと</rt></ruby>づいて<ruby><rb>小説</rb><rt>しょう せつ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>書</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>いた。</span>／<span class="translation">I wrote a novel based on a true story.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>計画表</rb><rt>けい かく ひょう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>基</rb><rt>もと</rt></ruby>づいて<ruby><rb>行動</rb><rt>こう どう</rt></ruby>する。</span>／<span class="translation">She proceeds according to the schedule.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>過去</rb><rt>か こ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>経験</rb><rt>けい けん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>基</rb><rt>もと</rt></ruby>づいて<ruby><rb>判断</rb><rt>はん だん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>下</rb><rt>くだ</rt></ruby>す。</span>／<span class="translation">He makes judgments based on past experience.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>この<ruby><rb>小説</rb><rt>しょう せつ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>実際</rb><rt>じっ さい</rt></ruby>にあったことに<ruby><rb>基</rb><rt>もと</rt></ruby>づいている。</span>／<span class="translation">This novel is based on something that actually happened.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>長年</rb><rt>なが ねん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>経験</rb><rt>けい けん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>基</rb><rt>もと</rt></ruby>づいた<ruby><rb>判断</rb><rt>はん だん</rt></ruby>だから、<ruby><rb>信頼</rb><rt>しん らい</rt></ruby>できる。</span>／<span class="translation">Because her judgment is based on many years of experience, I can rely on it.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “founded on something” or “on the basis of something.” Can be used as a predicate, as shown in (4). When it modifies a noun, it takes the form ...にもとづいたN, as shown in (5). The form ...にもとづいてのN may also be used.</div></body></html>