<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>にはあたらない</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0820.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【には】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0822.xhtml">【にはおよばない】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x73631">【にはあたらない】</h1><h4 class="info">［V-るにはあたらない］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>中学校</rb><rt>ちゅう がっ こう</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>教師</rb><rt>きょう し</rt></ruby>をしている<ruby><rb>友人</rb><rt>ゆう じん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はなし</rt></ruby>によると、<ruby><rb>学校</rb><rt>がっ こう</rt></ruby>でのいじめが<ruby><rb>深刻</rb><rt>しん こく</rt></ruby>だという。しかし<ruby><rb>驚</rb><rt>おどろ</rt></ruby>くにはあたらない。<ruby><rb>大人</rb><rt>おとな</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>社会</rb><rt>しゃ かい</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>同</rb><rt>おな</rt></ruby>じなのだから。</span>／<span class="translation">According to my friend who is teaching in junior high school, the problem of bullying at school is serious. But there’s nothing surprising about that. The same problem can be seen in adult society.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>ひとりだけ<ruby><rb>仲間</rb><rt>なか ま</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>置</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>いて<ruby><rb>下山</rb><rt>げ ざん</rt></ruby>したからといって、<ruby><rb>非難</rb><rt>ひ なん</rt></ruby>するには<ruby><rb>当</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>たらない。あのような<ruby><rb>天候</rb><rt>てん こう</rt></ruby>のもとではそれ<ruby><rb>以外</rb><rt>い がい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>方法</rb><rt>ほう ほう</rt></ruby>はなかっただろう。</span>／<span class="translation">You can’t put the blame on him just because he left friends and went down the mountain. I think there was no other thing for him to do under such weather conditions.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>子</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>どもがちっとも<ruby><rb>親</rb><rt>おや</rt></ruby>のいうことをきかないからといって、<ruby><rb>嘆</rb><rt>なげ</rt></ruby>くには<ruby><rb>当</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>たらない。きっといつか<ruby><rb>親</rb><rt>おや</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>心</rb><rt>こころ</rt></ruby>がわかる<ruby><rb>日</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby>がくる。</span>／<span class="translation">It’s nothing to be surprised at just because a child doesn’t listen to his parents. One day, he will understand how parents feel toward their children.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>会議</rb><rt>かい ぎ</rt></ruby>でひとことも<ruby><rb>発言</rb><rt>はつ げん</rt></ruby>しなかったからといって<ruby><rb>責</rb><rt>せ</rt></ruby>めるには<ruby><rb>当</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>たらない。あのワンマン<ruby><rb>社長</rb><rt>しゃ ちょう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>前</rb><rt>まえ</rt></ruby>ではだれでもそうなのだ。</span>／<span class="translation">There’s no need to criticize him just because he didn’t speak a word at the meeting. In front of that dictatorial president, everybody behaves like that. </span></div><div class="explanation">With a verb such as 驚く(be surprised) or 非難する(reprove), expresses the meaning of “it is not appropriate, it is off the point.” Often used with an expression showing some reason, such as ...からといって, and means “it is off the point to be surprised at or blame someone because of such a reason.” </div></body></html>