<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>かつて</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0126.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【かつ】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0128.xhtml">【がてら】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x11463">【かつて】</h1><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>このあたりは、かつては<ruby><rb>有名</rb><rt>ゆう めい</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>米</rb><rt>こめ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>産地</rb><rt>さん ち</rt></ruby>だった。</span>／<span class="translation">This area was once famous for rice production.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>はかつて<ruby><rb>新聞社</rb><rt>しん ぶん しゃ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>特派員</rb><rt>とく は いん</rt></ruby>として<ruby><rb>日本</rb><rt>に ほん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>滞在</rb><rt>たい ざい</rt></ruby>したことがあるそうだ。</span>／<span class="translation">I hear that she once resided in Japan as a correspondent for a newspaper company.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>今度</rb><rt>こん ど</rt></ruby>この<ruby><rb>地方</rb><rt>ち ほう</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>地震</rb><rt>じ しん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>起</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>こるとすれば、それはかつてないほどの<ruby><rb>規模</rb><rt>き ぼ</rt></ruby>のものになる<ruby><rb>恐</rb><rt>おそ</rt></ruby>れがある。</span>／<span class="translation">If an earthquake were to occur in this area now, it is likely to be on an unprecedented scale.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>久</rb><rt>ひさ</rt></ruby>しぶりに<ruby><rb>会</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>った<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>相撲</rb><rt>すもう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>取</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>りのように<ruby><rb>太</rb><rt>ふと</rt></ruby>っていて、かつての<ruby><rb>精悍</rb><rt>せい かん</rt></ruby>なスポーツマンの<ruby><rb>面影</rb><rt>おも かげ</rt></ruby>はどこにもなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">When I met him after a long time, he was as fat as a <i>sumo</i> wrestler, without a trace of the fierce sportsman he had once been.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>わが<ruby><rb>国</rb><rt>くに</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>主食</rb><rt>しゅ しょく</rt></ruby>である<ruby><rb>米</rb><rt>こめ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>生産</rb><rt>せい さん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>外国</rb><rt>がい こく</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>頼</rb><rt>たよ</rt></ruby>るなどということは、<ruby><rb>未</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>だかつてなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">Neither now nor in the past has our country ever depended on foreign nations for the production of rice, our staple food.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “before now, in the past.” Sometimes pronounced as かって. When used in the negative form, like かつてない in (3) and (5), it means something has never happened before. かつてない and 未だかつて...ない are idiomatic expressions. Tends to be used in spoken language.</div></body></html>