<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>をもとに</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part1079.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【をふまえ】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part1081.xhtml">【をものともせずに】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x108194">【をもとに】</h1><h4 class="info">［Nをもとに（して）］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>実際</rb><rt>じっ さい</rt></ruby>にあった<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はなし</rt></ruby>をもとにして<ruby><rb>脚本</rb><rt>きゃく ほん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>書</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>いた。</span>／<span class="translation">I wrote the screenplay based on a true story.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>のうわさだけをもとにして<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>判断</rb><rt>はん だん</rt></ruby>するのはよくない。</span>／<span class="translation">It is not good to judge people only on the basis of gossip.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>この<ruby><rb>地方</rb><rt>ち ほう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>伝</rb><rt>つた</rt></ruby>わる<ruby><rb>伝説</rb><rt>でん せつ</rt></ruby>をもとにして、<ruby><rb>幻想的</rb><rt>げん そう てき</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>映画</rb><rt>えい が</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>作</rb><rt>つく</rt></ruby>ってみたい。</span>／<span class="translation">I want to make a fantasy movie based on a traditional legend of this area.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>調査</rb><rt>ちょう さ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>団</rb><rt>だん</rt></ruby>からの<ruby><rb>報告</rb><rt>ほう こく</rt></ruby>をもとに<ruby><rb>救援</rb><rt>きゅう えん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>物資</rb><rt>ぶっ し</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>調達</rb><rt>ちょう たつ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>おこな</rt></ruby>われた。</span>／<span class="translation">Relief supplies were procured on the basis of the report of the inquiry commission.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>史実</rb><rt>し じつ</rt></ruby>をもとにした<ruby><rb>作品</rb><rt>さく ひん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>書</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>げた。</span>／<span class="translation">I wrote a work based on historical fact.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “taking a particular thing as material, a hint, or the basis for (something).” When it modifies a noun, as in example (5), it becomes NをもとにしたN. </div></body></html>