<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>かえって</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0109.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【かい】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0111.xhtml">【かえる】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x10247">【かえって】</h1><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>親切</rb><rt>しん せつ</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ったつもりなのだが、かえって<ruby><rb>怒</rb><rt>おこ</rt></ruby>らせてしまったようだ。</span>／<span class="translation">I meant to say it out of kindness, but it made her angry instead.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>間</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>合</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>うようにと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>ってタクシーに<ruby><rb>乗</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>ったのに、<ruby><rb>渋滞</rb><rt>じゅう たい</rt></ruby>のせいでかえって<ruby><rb>遅</rb><rt>おそ</rt></ruby>くなってしまった。</span>／<span class="translation">Even though I took a cab so I would arrive in time, I ended up being late because of a traffic jam.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>昨日</rb><rt>きのう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>ったカーテンは<ruby><rb>少</rb><rt>すこ</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>派手</rb><rt>は で</rt></ruby>すぎたかなと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>っていたが、かえって<ruby><rb>部屋</rb><rt>へ や</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>明</rb><rt>あか</rt></ruby>るくなってよかった。</span>／<span class="translation">I was afraid that the curtains I bought yesterday were too loud, but I’m happy to say that they’ve made the room brighter.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><span class="number">A:</span>お<ruby><rb>見舞</rb><rt>み ま</rt></ruby>いに<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>てくれたお<ruby><rb>礼</rb><rt>れい</rt></ruby>に、<ruby><rb>川井</rb><rt>かわ い</rt></ruby>さんにはお<ruby><rb>菓子</rb><rt>か し</rt></ruby>でも<ruby><rb>持</rb><rt>も</rt></ruby>って<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>こうか。</span>／<span class="translation">Shall I bring a box of cookies or something to thank Kawai-san for visiting me when I was ill? </span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>いや、そんなことをしたら、かえって<ruby><rb>向</rb><rt>む</rt></ruby>こうが<ruby><rb>気</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>遣</rb><rt>つか</rt></ruby>うよ。</span>／<span class="translation">No, if you did that, it would just make her feel beholden. </span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><span class="number">A:</span>この<ruby><rb>間</rb><rt>あいだ</rt></ruby>はひどいことを<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ってしまって、<ruby><rb>悪</rb><rt>わる</rt></ruby>かった。</span>／<span class="translation">I’m sorry I said such an awful thing the other day.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>いや、かえって<ruby><rb>良</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>かったよ。あれから<ruby><rb>君</rb><rt>きみ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>言葉</rb><rt>こと ば</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>だ</rt></ruby>してぼくもいろいろ<ruby><rb>反省</rb><rt>はん せい</rt></ruby>したんだ。</span>／<span class="translation">No, it was actually good. After that, I thought over many things that you had said. </span></div><div class="explanation">Used when a result is the opposite of one’s intention or expectation. Example (1) means “contrary to expectation, something said out of kindness to another person made him angry,” and (4) means “one would expect that bringing a box of cookies would make someone happy, but instead it would make her feel beholden.” Example (5) means “I thought I hurt the other person because I said such an awful thing, but it was actually a good chance for him to reflect on his conduct.” Indicates an outcome that is contrary to what one might expect in normal circumstances. It is therefore not likely to be used for unpredictable events.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>今日は雨が降ると思っていたが、かえっていい天気になった。／I thought it would rain today, but instead it was a beautiful day.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>今日は雨が降ると思っていたが、いい天気になった。／I thought it would rain today, but it turned out to be a beautiful day.</div></body></html>