<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>など</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0691.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【なぜならば...からだ】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0693.xhtml">【なに...ない】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x63456">【など】</h1><div class="explanation">In casual speech, なんか is used instead of など.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x63468"><span class="number">1. </span>...など</h2><h3 class="subsubtitle" id="idsubsubtitlex1x63471"><span class="number">a. </span>Nなど</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>ウェイトレスや<ruby><rb>皿洗</rb><rt>さら あら</rt></ruby>いなどのアルバイトをして<ruby><rb>学費</rb><rt>がく ひ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>貯</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>めた。</span>／<span class="translation">I did part-time jobs like waitressing and dishwashing to save money for my school expenses.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><span class="number">A:</span>このスーツに<ruby><rb>合</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>うブラウスを<ruby><rb>探</rb><rt>さが</rt></ruby>しているんですけど...。</span>／<span class="translation">I’m looking for a blouse that goes with this suit, but....</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>これなどいかがでしょうか。お<ruby><rb>似合</rb><rt>に あ</rt></ruby>いだと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>いますよ。</span>／<span class="translation">How about something like this? I think it’ll look good on you.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>デパートやスーパーなどの<ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>きな<ruby><rb>店</rb><rt>みせ</rt></ruby>ができたために、<ruby><rb>小</rb><rt>ちい</rt></ruby>さな<ruby><rb>店</rb><rt>みせ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>経営</rb><rt>けい えい</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>苦</rb><rt>くる</rt></ruby>しくなった。</span>／<span class="translation">Since large retailers like the department store and the supermarket were built, the small shops have found it hard to stay in business.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to present a few main examples out of a larger range of items. Implies that there are other similar items as well.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x63514"><span class="number">b. </span>V-るなどする</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>ひげをそるなどして、もうすこし<ruby><rb>身</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>だしなみに<ruby><rb>気</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>付</rb><rt>つ</rt></ruby>けてほしい。</span>／<span class="translation">I wish you’d pay a little more attention to your personal appearance, including things like shaving.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>時</rb><rt>とき</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>呼</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>びつけて<ruby><rb>注意</rb><rt>ちゅう い</rt></ruby>するなどしたのですが、あまり<ruby><rb>効</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>目</rb><rt>め</rt></ruby>はなかったようです。</span>／<span class="translation">Sometimes I did call her in and give her advice and whatever, but it doesn't seem to have been very effective.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to present a few main examples out of a larger range of actions. Implies that there are other similar actions as well.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x63539"><span class="number">2. </span>...などと</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>学校</rb><rt>がっ こう</rt></ruby>をやめるなどと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>って、みんなを<ruby><rb>困</rb><rt>こま</rt></ruby>らせている。</span>／<span class="translation">It’s a big headache for all of us because he’s saying things like he’s going to leave school.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>来年</rb><rt>らい ねん</rt></ruby>になれば<ruby><rb>景気</rb><rt>けい き</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>持</rb><rt>も</rt></ruby>ち<ruby><rb>直</rb><rt>なお</rt></ruby>すから<ruby><rb>大丈夫</rb><rt>だい じょう ぶ</rt></ruby>などとのんきなことを<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>っている。</span>／<span class="translation">She’s making these casual comments, like everything will be all right next year since the economy is going to improve.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>東京</rb><rt>とう きょう</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>探</rb><rt>さが</rt></ruby>すなどと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>って、<ruby><rb>家</rb><rt>いえ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>たきり<ruby><rb>帰</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>ってこない。</span>／<span class="translation">After he said he was going to find a job in Tokyo or whatever, he left home and hasn’t been back.</span></div><div class="explanation">などと, followed by a verb of utterance such as 言う, is used to express the gist of something that someone has said. This pattern is used for quotation, but it implies that other similar things may also have been said.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x63570"><span class="number">3. </span>...など...ない</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>あなたの<ruby><rb>顔</rb><rt>かお</rt></ruby>など<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>たくない。</span>／<span class="translation">I don’t even want to look at you.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>嘘</rb><rt>うそ</rt></ruby>などつきませんよ。</span>／<span class="translation">I would never tell a lie.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>賛成</rb><rt>さん せい</rt></ruby>するなどと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>っていない。</span>／<span class="translation">I never said I would agree.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>あんな<ruby><rb>男</rb><rt>おとこ</rt></ruby>となどいっしょに<ruby><rb>働</rb><rt>はたら</rt></ruby>きたくない。</span>／<span class="translation">I don’t want to work with a guy like that.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>そんなことで<ruby><rb>驚</rb><rt>おどろ</rt></ruby>いたりなどしないさ。</span>／<span class="translation">I just wouldn’t be surprised by such a thing.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>別</rb><rt>べつ</rt></ruby>にあなたを<ruby><rb>非難</rb><rt>ひ なん</rt></ruby>してなどいませんよ。</span>／<span class="translation">I’m not blaming you or anything, you know.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（7）</span>こんな<ruby><rb>難</rb><rt>むずか</rt></ruby>しい<ruby><rb>問題</rb><rt>もん だい</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>のようなものになど<ruby><rb>解</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>けるはずがありません。</span>／<span class="translation">I’m not at all the person to be able to answer such a difficult question.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（8）</span>こんな<ruby><rb>結果</rb><rt>けっ か</rt></ruby>になるなどとは<ruby><rb>考</rb><rt>かんが</rt></ruby>えてもみませんでした。</span>／<span class="translation">I never thought it would come to something like this.</span></div><div class="explanation">など attaches to a variety of constituents, including nouns, verbs, and noun + particle combinations, and is followed by a negative expression. This pattern expresses not only the negation of a certain thing, situation, or event but also the speaker’s feeling of contempt, modesty, surprise, etc. with respect to whatever is marked by など.</div><div class="explanation">For instance, (7) simultaneously conveys the meaning that there is no way the speaker could ever answer such a difficult question and the sense that the speaker is humble and does not hold too high an opinion of <span class="noSeparate">him/her</span>self.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x63641"><span class="number">4. </span>...など...V-るものか</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>そんな<ruby><rb>馬鹿</rb><rt>ば か</rt></ruby>げた<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はなし</rt></ruby>などだれが<ruby><rb>信</rb><rt>しん</rt></ruby>じるものか。</span>／<span class="translation">Who would ever swallow such a ridiculous story? </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>お<ruby><rb>前</rb><rt>まえ</rt></ruby>になど<ruby><rb>教</rb><rt>おし</rt></ruby>えてやるものか。</span>／<span class="translation">Why would I ever tell someone like you? </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>あんなやつを<ruby><rb>助</rb><rt>たす</rt></ruby>けてなどやるものか。</span>／<span class="translation">He’s the last guy I’d ever help!</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>これくらいの<ruby><rb>怪我</rb><rt>け が</rt></ruby>でだれが<ruby><rb>死</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>になどするものか。</span>／<span class="translation">No one ever died from such a minor injury!</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>気持</rb><rt>き も</rt></ruby>ちがあなたなどに<ruby><rb>分</rb><rt>わ</rt></ruby>かるものですか。</span>／<span class="translation">How on earth would someone like you ever understand my feelings?</span></div><div class="explanation">May be preceded by a variety of constituents, including nouns, verbs, and noun + particle combinations. Expresses a strong negation, as well as the speaker’s feeling that the person, thing, or situation marked by など is trivial and worthy only of contempt.</div></body></html>