<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>はんめん</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0897.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【はんたいに】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0899.xhtml">【ひいては】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x83386">【はんめん】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x83388"><span class="number">1. </span>...はんめん</h2><h4 class="info">［Nであるはんめん］</h4><h4 class="info">［Na　な／である　はんめん］</h4><h4 class="info">［A-いはんめん］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-るはんめん］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>この<ruby><rb>薬</rb><rt>くすり</rt></ruby>はよく<ruby><rb>効</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>く<ruby><rb>反面</rb><rt>はん めん</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>副作用</rb><rt>ふく さ よう</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>強</rb><rt>つよ</rt></ruby>い。</span>／<span class="translation">This medicine works very well, but on the other hand, it has strong side effects. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>化学繊維</rb><rt>か がく せん い</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>丈夫</rb><rt>じょう ぶ</rt></ruby>である<ruby><rb>反面</rb><rt>はん めん</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>火</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>弱</rb><rt>よわ</rt></ruby>いという<ruby><rb>欠点</rb><rt>けっ てん</rt></ruby>がある。</span>／<span class="translation">While synthetic fiber is strong, the drawback is that it’s not fire-resistant. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>自動車</rb><rt>じ どう しゃ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>便利</rb><rt>べん り</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>反面</rb><rt>はん めん</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>交通</rb><rt>こう つう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>事故</rb><rt>じ こ</rt></ruby>や<ruby><rb>大気</rb><rt>たい き</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>汚染</rb><rt>お せん</rt></ruby>というマイナスの<ruby><rb>側面</rb><rt>そく めん</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>持</rb><rt>も</rt></ruby>っている。</span>／<span class="translation">Cars are convenient, but at the same time they have negative aspects such as being associated with traffic accidents and air pollution. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>目上</rb><rt>め うえ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>対</rb><rt>たい</rt></ruby>しては<ruby><rb>腰</rb><rt>こし</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>低</rb><rt>ひく</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>反面</rb><rt>はん めん</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>目下</rb><rt>め した</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>対</rb><rt>たい</rt></ruby>してはいばっている。</span>／<span class="translation">Although he is courteous to people with higher status, he looks down his nose at those with lower status.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>おじはがんこ<ruby><rb>者</rb><rt>もの</rt></ruby>である<ruby><rb>反面</rb><rt>はん めん</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>涙</rb><rt>なみだ</rt></ruby>もろい<ruby><rb>性格</rb><rt>せい かく</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">My uncle is a stubborn mule, but at the same time he is quite sentimental. </span></div><div class="explanation">Means “but on the contrary....” Expresses the co-existence of two contrasting aspects within a single thing or situation. </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x83439"><span class="number">2. </span>そのはんめん（では）</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>田中</rb><rt>た なか</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>先生</rb><rt>せん せい</rt></ruby>はたいへんきびしい<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>かた</rt></ruby>だが、その<ruby><rb>反面</rb><rt>はん めん</rt></ruby>、とてもやさしいところもある。</span>／<span class="translation">Tanaka-sensei is very strict, but on the other hand, he has a streak of real kindness.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>加藤</rb><rt>か とう</rt></ruby>さんは<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>速</rb><rt>はや</rt></ruby>いので<ruby><rb>有名</rb><rt>ゆう めい</rt></ruby>だ。しかし、その<ruby><rb>反面</rb><rt>はん めん</rt></ruby>、ミスも<ruby><rb>多</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>い。</span>／<span class="translation">Kato-san is well-known as a quick worker. However, at the same time, she makes a lot of mistakes.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>急激</rb><rt>きゅう げき</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>近代化</rb><rt>きん だい か</rt></ruby>とそれに<ruby><rb>伴</rb><rt>ともな</rt></ruby>う<ruby><rb>経済</rb><rt>けい ざい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>成長</rb><rt>せい ちょう</rt></ruby>のおかげで、<ruby><rb>我々</rb><rt>われ われ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>生活</rb><rt>せい かつ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>確</rb><rt>たし</rt></ruby>かに<ruby><rb>向上</rb><rt>こう じょう</rt></ruby>した。だが、その<ruby><rb>反面</rb><rt>はん めん</rt></ruby>では、<ruby><rb>伝統的</rb><rt>でん とう てき</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>固有</rb><rt>こ ゆう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>文化</rb><rt>ぶん か</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>失</rb><rt>うしな</rt></ruby>われるという<ruby><rb>結果</rb><rt>けっ か</rt></ruby>をもたらした。</span>／<span class="translation">Thanks to rapid modernization and the economic growth that came with it, the quality of our lifestyle has definitely improved. Still, the downside is that this has resulted in the loss of our unique traditional culture. </span></div><div class="explanation">Means the same as Usage 1. Used in the pattern ...が／けれど、その反面... (...but, on the other hand...), as shown in (1), or (しかし／だが)その反面(では)... (however/still, at the same time...), as shown in (2) and (3).</div></body></html>