<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>がたい</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0121.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【がさいご】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0123.xhtml">【かたがた】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x11172">【がたい】</h1><h4 class="info">［R-がたい］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>信</rb><rt>しん</rt></ruby>じがたいことだが<ruby><rb>本当</rb><rt>ほん  とう</rt></ruby>なのだ。</span>／<span class="translation">It’s hard to believe, but it’s true.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>あいつの<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>うことは<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>根拠</rb><rt>こん きょ</rt></ruby>もないし<ruby><rb>常識</rb><rt>じょう しき</rt></ruby>はずれで、とうてい<ruby><rb>理解</rb><rt>り かい</rt></ruby>しがたい。</span>／<span class="translation">What he says is groundless, absurd, and hardly comprehensible.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>日本</rb><rt>に ほん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>戦時中</rb><rt>せん じ ちゅう</rt></ruby>にアジア<ruby><rb>諸国</rb><rt>しょ こく</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>名</rb><rt>な</rt></ruby>もない<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>たちを<ruby><rb>理由</rb><rt>り ゆう</rt></ruby>もなく<ruby><rb>殺</rb><rt>ころ</rt></ruby>したことは、<ruby><rb>動</rb><rt>うご</rt></ruby>かしがたい<ruby><rb>事実</rb><rt>じ じつ</rt></ruby>である。</span>／<span class="translation">It is an indisputable fact that, during the war, the Japanese Army killed ordinary people in Asian countries for no reason.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>部下</rb><rt>ぶ か</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>女性</rb><rt>じょ せい</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>対</rb><rt>たい</rt></ruby>するセクシャル・ハラスメントで<ruby><rb>告発</rb><rt>こく はつ</rt></ruby>されたにもかかわらず、まるで<ruby><rb>反省</rb><rt>はん せい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>色</rb><rt>いろ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>えないばかりか、あの<ruby><rb>女</rb><rt>おんな</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>無能</rb><rt>む のう</rt></ruby>だなどと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>いふらしており、まったく<ruby><rb>許</rb><rt>ゆる</rt></ruby>しがたい。</span>／<span class="translation">Though he was prosecuted by a female subordinate for sexual harassment, he not only shows no sign of remorse, he’s also spreading reports that she’s incompetent. That’s really unpardonable!</span></div><div class="explanation">Attaches to a verb stem and means that an action is difficult or impossible to do. Combines with verbs of perception and awareness, as in 想像しがたい (hard to imagine), 認めがたい (hard to admit/accept), (考えを) 受け入れがたい (hard to accept other people’s (opinions/ideas)), 賛成しがたい (difficult to agree with). Also used with verbs of utterance, as in 言いがたい (hard to say) and 表しがたい (difficult to express). 動かしがたい事実 in (3) is an idiomatic expression that means something is undeniably true. Often used in written language.</div></body></html>