<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ひではない</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0902.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ひじょうに】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0904.xhtml">【ひとつ】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x83605">【ひではない】</h1><h4 class="info">［Nのひではない］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>アラビア<ruby><rb>語</rb><rt>ご</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>難</rb><rt>むずか</rt></ruby>しさは<ruby><rb>英語</rb><rt>えい ご</rt></ruby>などの<ruby><rb>比</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby>ではない。</span>／<span class="translation">The difficulty of Arabic is unmatched by English and other such languages.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>専門的</rb><rt>せん もん てき</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>教育</rb><rt>きょう いく</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>受</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>けたことはないが、その<ruby><rb>博識</rb><rt>はく しき</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>並</rb><rt>なみ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>学者</rb><rt>がく しゃ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>比</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby>ではない。</span>／<span class="translation">Though he has never received any special training, the depth of his knowledge cannot be matched by any ordinary scholar.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>現在</rb><rt>げん ざい</rt></ruby>でも<ruby><rb>医学部</rb><rt>い がく ぶ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>入学</rb><rt>にゅう がく</rt></ruby>することは<ruby><rb>難</rb><rt>むずか</rt></ruby>しい。しかし、<ruby><rb>当時</rb><rt>とう じ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>女性</rb><rt>じょ せい</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>医者</rb><rt>い しゃ</rt></ruby>になることの<ruby><rb>困難</rb><rt>こん なん</rt></ruby>さは<ruby><rb>現代</rb><rt>げん だい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>比</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby>ではなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">Even now it is not easy to enter medical school.  However, the difficulties a woman faces in order to become a doctor nowadays can’t begin to compare with  the difficulties in those times.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “incomparable, to the extent that there is no comparison.”</div></body></html>