<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>とんだ</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0640.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【とわず】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0642.xhtml">【とんでもない】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x59575">【とんだ】</h1><h4 class="info">［とんだN］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>あなたが<ruby><rb>邪魔</rb><rt>じゃ ま</rt></ruby>したなどと、とんだ<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>違</rb><rt>ちが</rt></ruby>いをしていました。</span>／<span class="translation">Saying that you had disturbed me was a complete misunderstanding on my part. </span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>通勤</rb><rt>つう きん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>途中</rb><rt>と ちゅう</rt></ruby>で、<ruby><rb>事故</rb><rt>じ こ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>遭</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>ってしまったんですよ。</span>／<span class="translation">I had an accident on my way to work, you know.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>それはとんだ<ruby><rb>災難</rb><rt>さい なん</rt></ruby>でしたね。</span>／<span class="translation">What a terrible thing to have happened! </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>親</rb><rt>おや</rt></ruby>にかくれてたばこを<ruby><rb>吸</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>うとは、とんだ<ruby><rb>不良</rb><rt>ふ りょう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>娘</rb><rt>むすめ</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">What a terrible daughter, to smoke behind her parents’ backs.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>もし1<ruby><rb>分</rb><rt>ぷん</rt></ruby>でも<ruby><rb>気</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>付</rb><rt>つ</rt></ruby>くのが<ruby><rb>遅</rb><rt>おく</rt></ruby>れていたら、とんだ<ruby><rb>大事故</rb><rt>だい じ こ</rt></ruby>になっていたかもしれない。</span>／<span class="translation">If I had noticed even just one minute later, it might have turned into a disastrous accident. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>とんだ<ruby><rb>野郎</rb><rt>や ろう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>見込</rb><rt>み こ</rt></ruby>まれてしまったものだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Some guy like that is counting on me.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>委員会</rb><rt>い いん かい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>議長</rb><rt>ぎ ちょう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>選</rb><rt>えら</rt></ruby>ばれるとは、とんだことになってしまった。</span>／<span class="translation">Being elected to chair the committee was totally unexpected.</span></div><div class="explanation">とんだ precedes a noun referring to a person or situation and means that the person or situation is contrary to one’s expectations. It usually conveys a negative evaluation, with the meaning of “awful,” “stunning; shocking,” “troublesome,” or “terrible,” and is used to describe an unexpected result or a person who doesn’t conform to commonly-accepted standards of behavior. However, in cases such as (5) above, とんだ can also convey a positive evaluation that implies warmth and familiarity, with the meaning of “(a) unique and uncommon (individual).”</div></body></html>