<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>とばかり</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0619.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【とはかぎらない】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0621.xhtml">【とはちがって】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x58684">【とばかり】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x58686"><span class="number">1. </span>...とばかり</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>がチャンスとばかり、チャンピオンは<ruby><rb>猛烈</rb><rt>もう れつ</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>攻撃</rb><rt>こう げき</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>開始</rb><rt>かい し</rt></ruby>した。</span>／<span class="translation">The champion launched a fierce attack, as if to say that this was a chance not to be missed.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>横綱</rb><rt>よこ づな</rt></ruby>はいつでもかかってこいとばかりに<ruby><rb>身構</rb><rt>み がま</rt></ruby>えた。</span>／<span class="translation">The <i>y</i><i>okozuna</i> (a <i>sumo</i><i>o</i> wrestler of the highest rank) stood poised to attack, as if to say, “Come and get me!”</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>もう<ruby><rb>二度</rb><rt>に ど</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>るなとばかりに<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>目</rb><rt>め</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>前</rb><rt>まえ</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>ピシャッと</rb><rt>ぴしゃっと</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>戸</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>閉</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>めた。</span>／<span class="translation">She slammed the door in my very face, as much as to say, “Never come back!”</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>「どうだ、すごいだろう」とばかりに、<ruby><rb>新</rb><rt>あたら</rt></ruby>しい<ruby><rb>車</rb><rt>くるま</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>せびらかしている。</span>／<span class="translation">He’s showing off his brand-new car to us, as much as to say, “Look! Isn’t this great?”</span></div><div class="explanation">Used after a clause, とばかりexpresses the meaning “as if to say....” It is used to convey the speaker’s sense that another person actually wants to say something like what is expressed in the とばかり clause. とばかりis followed by words/phrases that indicate a strong degree of vigor or force. It is a formal, mainly written expression and is often used in idiomatic expressions, such as この時とばかりに攻め込む／攻めかかる “now is the time to strike/attack” and えいっとばかりに切りつける／切りかかる “slash at/strike at (someone) with all one’s might” (lit. “with a shout of exertion; with a battle cry”).</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x58733"><span class="number">2. </span>...といわんばかり</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>お<ruby><rb>前</rb><rt>まえ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>黙</rb><rt>だま</rt></ruby>っていろと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>わんばかりに<ruby><rb>兄</rb><rt>あに</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>をにらみつけた。</span>／<span class="translation">My older brother glared at me, as if to say, “Keep your mouth shut!”</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>警察</rb><rt>けい さつ</rt></ruby>は「お<ruby><rb>前</rb><rt>まえ</rt></ruby>がやったんだろう」と<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>わんばかりの<ruby><rb>態度</rb><rt>たい ど</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>男</rb><rt>おとこ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>尋問</rb><rt>じん もん</rt></ruby>した。</span>／<span class="translation">The attitude of the police officer as he interrogated the man was, “Come on, you know you did it!”</span></div><div class="explanation">Used after a clause, といわんばかり means “look/act as if <span class="noSeparate">s/he</span> is about to say....” Used in essentially the same way as 1 above.</div></body></html>