<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>れる1</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part1047.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【られる<sub class="variation">2</sub>】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part1049.xhtml">【れる<sub class="variation">2</sub>】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x105566">【れる<sub class="variation">1</sub>】</h1><div class="explanation">Demonstrates potential. In cases where the V in V-れる is a Group 1 verb, the dictionary form ending changes to the <i>e</i>-row sound and る is added, as in 行く(go)→行ける and 飲む(drink)→飲める. Where Group 2 verbs are used, られる is added to the stem, as in 食べる(eat)→食べられる. 来る(come) becomes こられる or これる and する(do) becomes できる. V-れる conjugates in the same way as Group 2 verbs.   </div><div class="explanation">In cases where the V is a Group 1 verb, the potential aspect takes the different form V-れる from the passive voice V-られる (for example the form of possibility becomes 飲める, 書ける (can drink, can write) while the passive form becomes 飲まれる, 書かれる(be drunk (by someone), be written (by someone)). On the other hand, Group 2 verbs take the same form for both the potential and passive voices (both become 食べられる(can eat/be eaten (by someone)), 起きられる(can get up/be gotten up (by someone)), for example). However, in speech nowadays, the more people are omitting the ら from the possible V-れる and so it becomes 食べれる, 起きれる. Also, more people are using NをV-れる rather than NがV-れる.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x105592"><span class="number">1. </span>NはNがV-れる</h2><div class="explanation">Generally NはNがV-れる is used but a person with an ability or potential is also sometimes indicated with Nに, as in NにNがV-れる.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x105608"><span class="number">a. </span>NはNがV-れる〈ability〉</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>リンさんはなっとうが<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べられますか。</span>／<span class="translation">Can Lyn-san eat <i>natto</i><i>o</i>?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>かれにできないスポーツはない。</span>／<span class="translation">There is no sport he cannot do.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>わたしにかれらの<ruby><rb>指導</rb><rt>し どう</rt></ruby>ができるだろうか。</span>／<span class="translation">I wonder if I can coach them?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>読</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>めない<ruby><rb>漢字</rb><rt>かん じ</rt></ruby>があったら、そう<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ってください。</span>／<span class="translation">If there are <i>kanji</i> you cannot read, please say so.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>この<ruby><rb>本</rb><rt>ほん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>読</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>み<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>だ</rt></ruby>したら、やめられない。</span>／<span class="translation">Once you start, you won’t be able to stop reading this book.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span>どうしてもあの<ruby><rb>先生</rb><rt>せん せい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>名前</rb><rt>な まえ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>だ</rt></ruby>せなくて<ruby><rb>冷</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby>や<ruby><rb>汗</rb><rt>あせ</rt></ruby>をかいた。</span>／<span class="translation">I couldn’t remember that teacher’s name no matter what and broke into a cold sweat.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（7）</span><ruby><rb>朝</rb><rt>あさ</rt></ruby>6<ruby><rb>時</rb><rt>じ</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>練習</rb><rt>れん しゅう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>開始</rb><rt>かい し</rt></ruby>しますので、<ruby><rb>起</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>きられたら<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>てください。</span>／<span class="translation">As practice will commence from six in the morning, please come if you can get up.</span></div><div class="explanation">This expresses a possibility dependant on ability, skill, or willpower.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x105674"><span class="number">b. </span>NはNがV-れる〈possibility〉</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>あの<ruby><rb>店</rb><rt>みせ</rt></ruby>ではいつも<ruby><rb>珍</rb><rt>めずら</rt></ruby>しいものが<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べられる。</span>／<span class="translation">You can always eat unusual things in that shop.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>仕事場</rb><rt>し ごと ば</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>はだれでもそのファックスが<ruby><rb>使用</rb><rt>し よう</rt></ruby>できる。</span>／<span class="translation">Everyone at the workplace can use that fax.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>この<ruby><rb>動物園</rb><rt>どう ぶつ えん</rt></ruby>では、<ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>無料</rb><rt>む りょう</rt></ruby>でイルカのショーが<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>られる。</span>／<span class="translation">At this zoo, children can watch the dolphin show for free.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>わたしが<ruby><rb>直接</rb><rt>ちょく せつ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はな</rt></ruby>せたらいいのですが、あいにく<ruby><rb>都合</rb><rt>つ ごう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>悪</rb><rt>わる</rt></ruby>いんです。</span>／<span class="translation">I would have liked to speak to them directly, but unfortunately it is not convenient.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>両親</rb><rt>りょう しん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>えないことでも、<ruby><rb>友達</rb><rt>とも だち</rt></ruby>になら<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>える。</span>／<span class="translation">I can say things to my friends that I can’t even say to my parents. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>辞書</rb><rt>じ しょ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>図書館</rb><rt>と しょ かん</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>借</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>り<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>だ</rt></ruby>せないので、ひまなときに<ruby><rb>調</rb><rt>しら</rt></ruby>べに<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>くつもりだ。</span>／<span class="translation">As you can’t take the dictionaries out of the library, I intend to go and look (it) up when I am free.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（7）</span><ruby><rb>昨日</rb><rt>きのう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>答</rb><rt>こた</rt></ruby>えが<ruby><rb>聞</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>けなかったので、きょうもう<ruby><rb>一度</rb><rt>いち ど</rt></ruby>たずねてみます。</span>／<span class="translation">As I wasn’t able to get a response yesterday, I’ll pay a visit again today.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses that there is a possibility which is dependent on the situation or on opportunity. 見られる(can see/can be seen) and 見える(can see) are similar expressions but the difference is that 見える is used in cases where a thing spontaneously comes into view while 見られる is used when the possibility of seeing a thing occurs because a particular situation or opportunity arises. </div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>昨夜のスポーツニュースはいそがしくて見られなかった。／I wasn’t able to see last night’s sports news as I was busy.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>昨夜のスポーツニュースはいそがしくて見えなかった。／I wasn’t able to see last night’s sports news as I was busy.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>ここから白い建物が見えます。／You can see a white building from here.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>ここから白い建物が見られます。／You can see a white building appear from here.</div><div class="explanation">聞ける and 聞こえる are the same in the sense that 聞ける shows that a thing spontaneously comes into hearing while 聞こえる is used when the possibility of hearing a thing occurs because a particular situation or opportunity arises.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>携帯ラジオをもってきたので、どこでも天気予報が聞ける。／Because I brought a handheld radio, we can hear the weather forecast anywhere.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>携帯ラジオをもってきたので、どこでも天気予報が聞こえる。／Because I brought a handheld radio, we can hear the weather forecast anywhere.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>どこからか鳥の声が聞こえた。／I could hear the sound of a bird from somewhere.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>どこからか鳥の声が聞けた。／I could hear the sound of a bird from somewhere.</div><div class="explanation">For eyesight and hearing 見える and 聞こえる are used.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>生まれたばかりの猫の子は目が見えない。／The eyes of a newborn kitten are blind.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>補聴器をつけたら、耳がよく聞こえるようになった。／Wearing a hearing aid I could hear much better.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x105842"><span class="number">2. </span>Nは V-れる〈characteristic〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>この<ruby><rb>野菜</rb><rt>や さい</rt></ruby>はなまでは<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べられない。</span>／<span class="translation">This vegetable cannot be eaten raw.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>この<ruby><rb>泉</rb><rt>いずみ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>水</rb><rt>みず</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>飲</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>めます。</span>／<span class="translation">This fountain’s water can be drunk.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>悲</rb><rt>かな</rt></ruby>しい<ruby><rb>映画</rb><rt>えい が</rt></ruby>かと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>ったが、<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>てみるとけっこう<ruby><rb>笑</rb><rt>わら</rt></ruby>える<ruby><rb>映画</rb><rt>えい が</rt></ruby>だった。</span>／<span class="translation">I had thought it was a sad movie, but watching it, it was quite funny.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>この<ruby><rb>教室</rb><rt>きょう しつ</rt></ruby>は300 <ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>にん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>楽</rb><rt>らく</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>はい</rt></ruby>れます。</span>／<span class="translation">This classroom can comfortably take 300 people.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses possibility as a property of a thing.</div></body></html>