<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>わけにはいかない</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part1056.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【わけても】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part1058.xhtml">【わざわざ】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x107123">【わけにはいかない】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x107125"><span class="number">1. </span>V-るわけに（は）いかない</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>ちょっと<ruby><rb>熱</rb><rt>ねつ</rt></ruby>があるが、<ruby><rb>今日</rb><rt>きょう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>大事</rb><rt>だい じ</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>会議</rb><rt>かい ぎ</rt></ruby>があるので<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>休</rb><rt>やす</rt></ruby>むわけにはいかない。</span>／<span class="translation">I have a bit of a fever but there is an important meeting today and so I can’t take a holiday from work.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>カラオケに<ruby><rb>誘</rb><rt>さそ</rt></ruby>われたが、<ruby><rb>明日</rb><rt>あ す</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>試験</rb><rt>し けん</rt></ruby>なので<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>くわけにもいかない。</span>／<span class="translation">I was invited to karaoke but I have tests from tomorrow and so I cannot make it.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>体調</rb><rt>たい ちょう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>崩</rb><rt>くず</rt></ruby>した<ruby><rb>仲間</rb><rt>なか ま</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>残</rb><rt>のこ</rt></ruby>して<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>くわけにもいかず、<ruby><rb>登山隊</rb><rt>と ざん たい</rt></ruby>はしかたなくそこから<ruby><rb>下山</rb><rt>げ ざん</rt></ruby>することになった。</span>／<span class="translation">They couldn’t leave their unwell friend behind and so the mountaineering party had no choice but to descend the mountain from there.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>いくらお<ruby><rb>金</rb><rt>かね</rt></ruby>をもらっても、お<ruby><rb>宅</rb><rt>たく</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>息子</rb><rt>むすこ</rt></ruby>さんを<ruby><rb>不正</rb><rt>ふ せい</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>入学</rb><rt>にゅう がく</rt></ruby>させるわけにはいきません。</span>／<span class="translation">However much money you give me, I can’t dishonestly allow your son to pass into this school.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>もう 30 <ruby><rb>近</rb><rt>ちか</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>娘</rb><rt>むすめ</rt></ruby>をいつまでも<ruby><rb>甘</rb><rt>あま</rt></ruby>やかしておくわけにもいかないが、かと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>って<ruby><rb>自立</rb><rt>じ りつ</rt></ruby>できる<ruby><rb>収入</rb><rt>しゅう にゅう</rt></ruby>もないのに<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>て<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>けと<ruby><rb>放</rb><rt>ほう</rt></ruby>り<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>だ</rt></ruby>すわけにもいかない。</span>／<span class="translation">I can’t keep spoiling my daughter who is almost thirty but, having said that, as she has no income by which she can be independent, neither can I just throw her out.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><span class="number">A:</span>うちで<ruby><rb>猫</rb><rt>ねこ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>飼</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>っていること、<ruby><rb>大家</rb><rt>おお や</rt></ruby>さんには<ruby><rb>内緒</rb><rt>ない しょ</rt></ruby>にしてもらえませんか。</span>／<span class="translation">Will you keep it a secret from the landlord that we’re keeping a cat in the house?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>いや、そういうわけにはいきませんよ。<ruby><rb>契約</rb><rt>けい やく</rt></ruby>ではだめなことになっているんですから。それにみんな<ruby><rb>猫</rb><rt>ねこ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>鳴</rb><rt>な</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>声</rb><rt>ごえ</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>迷惑</rb><rt>めい わく</rt></ruby>しているんですよ。</span>／<span class="translation">No, I can’t do that. It’s against the terms of the contract. Besides, everyone is annoyed by its cries.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “It is not possible to do so.” It does not simply mean “cannot do” but rather that “thinking from general knowledge, socially accepted ideas or past experience (something) cannot be done.”</div><div class="explanation">私はお酒が飲めない shows that the speaker is constitutionally a weak drinker and, therefore “cannot drink.” However, お酒を飲むわけにはいかない does not mean that constitutionally they are a weak drinker, but rather that, for some reason (for example, they have come by car), they cannot drink. Also, as in the そういうわけにはいかない of example (6) where it refers to the inability to keep the secret, it can also be used in acknowledging the previous sentence.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x107196"><span class="number">2. </span>V-ないわけに（は）いかない</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>他</rb><rt>ほか</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>ならともかく、あの<ruby><rb>上司</rb><rt>じょう し</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>飲</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>みに<ruby><rb>誘</rb><rt>さそ</rt></ruby>われたら<ruby><rb>付</rb><rt>つ</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>合</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>わないわけにはいかない。<ruby><rb>断</rb><rt>ことわ</rt></ruby>ると<ruby><rb>後</rb><rt>あと</rt></ruby>でどんなめんどうな<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>押</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>しつけられるかわからないのだから。</span>／<span class="translation">If it’s somebody else it’s okay, but if that supervisor invites you to go drinking with him, you have to go. If you refuse, you don’t know what kind of drudging job you’ll be made to do.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>実際</rb><rt>じっ さい</rt></ruby>にはもう<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>採用</rb><rt>さい よう</rt></ruby>することに<ruby><rb>決</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>まっていたが、<ruby><rb>形式上</rb><rt>けい しき じょう</rt></ruby>はめんどうでも<ruby><rb>試験</rb><rt>し けん</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>面接</rb><rt>めん せつ</rt></ruby>をしないわけにはいかなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">In reality we had already decided to employ him but, formally, even though it’s troublesome, we had to conduct an exam and interview.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>今日</rb><rt>きょう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>車</rb><rt>くるま</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>ているのでアルコールを<ruby><rb>飲</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>むわけにはいかないが、もし<ruby><rb>先輩</rb><rt>せん ぱい</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>飲</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>めと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>われたら<ruby><rb>飲</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>まないわけにもいかないし、どうしたらいいのだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">As I’ve come by car today I can’t drink alcohol, but if my superior tells me to drink I’ll have to. What should I do?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><span class="number">A:</span>あんなハードな<ruby><rb>練習</rb><rt>れん しゅう</rt></ruby>、もうやりたくないよ。<ruby><rb>疲</rb><rt>つか</rt></ruby>れるだけじゃないか。</span>／<span class="translation">I don’t want to do that kind of hard exercise any more. It will just make me tired (without any benefit).  </span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>そういうわけにはいかないだろう。<ruby><rb>監督</rb><rt>かん とく</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>逆</rb><rt>さか</rt></ruby>らったらレギュラーから<ruby><rb>降</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>ろされるぞ。</span>／<span class="translation">That’s no excuse. If you go against the coach you’ll be dropped as a regular. </span></div><div class="explanation">Connected to the negative form of a verb, this expresses the obligation that “It is not possible not to carry out that action,” in other words, “must do.” This also takes as its reason generally knowledge, socially accepted ideas or past experience. As in (4), it can also be used in the form そういうわけ or, in other words, やらないわけ. </div></body></html>