<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ばかりでなく...も</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0885.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ばかりか】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0887.xhtml">【ばこそ】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x82370">【ばかりでなく...も】</h1><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>山田</rb><rt>やま だ</rt></ruby>さんは<ruby><rb>英語</rb><rt>えい ご</rt></ruby>ばかりでなく<ruby><rb>中国語</rb><rt>ちゅう ごく ご</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はな</rt></ruby>せる。</span>／<span class="translation">Yamada-san can speak not only English but also Chinese. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>漢字</rb><rt>かん じ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>書</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>けないばかりではなく、ひらがなも<ruby><rb>書</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>けない。</span>／<span class="translation">She can write neither <i>kanji</i> nor <i>hiragana</i>. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>佐藤</rb><rt>さ とう</rt></ruby>さんがイギリスに<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>くことは、<ruby><rb>友人</rb><rt>ゆう じん</rt></ruby>ばかりではなく<ruby><rb>家族</rb><rt>か ぞく</rt></ruby>でさえも<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>らなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">Not only his friends but even his family had no idea that Sato-san would go to England. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>このアパートは、<ruby><rb>暑</rb><rt>あつ</rt></ruby>いばかりではなく<ruby><rb>音</rb><rt>おと</rt></ruby>もうるさい。</span>／<span class="translation">This apartment is not only hot, it’s also noisy. </span></div><div class="explanation">Used in the pattern XばかりでなくYも, which means “of course X, and also Y.” も can be replaced by まで (even) or さえ (even). In spoken Japanese, だけじゃなくて is used more often than ばかりでなく. </div></body></html>