<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>から1</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0150.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【がよかろう】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0152.xhtml">【から<sub class="variation">2</sub>】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x12485">【から<sub class="variation">1</sub>】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x12488"><span class="number">1. </span>Nから</h2><h3 class="subsubtitle" id="idsubsubtitlex1x12491"><span class="number">a. </span>Nから</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>この<ruby><rb>町</rb><rt>まち</rt></ruby>には、<ruby><rb>国</rb><rt>くに</rt></ruby>じゅうからたくさんの<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>があつまってくる。</span>／<span class="translation">This town draws many people from all over the country.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>あのクラスでは、<ruby><rb>試験</rb><rt>し けん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>成績</rb><rt>せい せき</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>出席率</rb><rt>しゅっ せき りつ</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>成績</rb><rt>せい せき</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>決</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>められるそうだよ。</span>／<span class="translation">I hear that in that class, grades are determined from the test scores and attendance.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>窓</rb><rt>まど</rt></ruby>からひざしがさしこんでいて、その<ruby><rb>部屋</rb><rt>へ や</rt></ruby>はとてもあたたかかった。</span>／<span class="translation">The room was very warm, with the sunshine streaming in from the windows.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>父</rb><rt>ちち</rt></ruby>からはこっぴどくしかられるし、<ruby><rb>母</rb><rt>はは</rt></ruby>からはいやみを<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>われるし、さんざんな<ruby><rb>失敗</rb><rt>しっ ぱい</rt></ruby>だった。</span>／<span class="translation">I was severely scolded by my father and spoken to sarcastically by my mother, and it was a terrible failure.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>成績</rb><rt>せい せき</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>不振</rb><rt>ふ しん</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>解雇</rb><rt>かい こ</rt></ruby>されたそのチームの<ruby><rb>監督</rb><rt>かん とく</rt></ruby>はいまテレビの<ruby><rb>解説者</rb><rt>かい せつ しゃ</rt></ruby>をしている。</span>／<span class="translation">The manager of that team, who was dismissed because of a bad record, is now a commentator on television.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>日本</rb><rt>に ほん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>衆議院</rb><rt>しゅう ぎ いん</rt></ruby>・<ruby><rb>参議院</rb><rt>さん ぎ いん</rt></ruby>からなる<ruby><rb>二院制</rb><rt>に いん せい</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>取</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>っている。</span>／<span class="translation">Japan has a bicameral system comprised of the House of Representatives and the House of Councilors.</span></div><div class="explanation">Nから expresses the starting point, beginning, or origin of various actions and phenomena.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x12540"><span class="number">b. </span>NからNまで</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>ここから<ruby><rb>目的地</rb><rt>もく てき ち</rt></ruby>までは 10 キロほどあります。</span>／<span class="translation">It is about ten kilometers from here to our destination.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>10 <ruby><rb>日</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>から 15 <ruby><rb>日</rb><rt>にち</rt></ruby>まで<ruby><rb>休</rb><rt>やす</rt></ruby>みます。</span>／<span class="translation">This store will be closed from the 10th through the 15th.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>子</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>どもから<ruby><rb>大人</rb><rt>おとな</rt></ruby>まで<ruby><rb>楽</rb><rt>たの</rt></ruby>しめる<ruby><rb>番組</rb><rt>ばん ぐみ</rt></ruby>です。</span>／<span class="translation">Everyone—from children to adults—can enjoy this program.</span></div><div class="explanation">When a starting point and endpoint are specified, から expresses a range of distance or time.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x12571"><span class="number">c. </span>NからNにいたるまで</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>あの<ruby><rb>会社</rb><rt>かい しゃ</rt></ruby>はヒラ<ruby><rb>社員</rb><rt>しゃ いん</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>社長</rb><rt>しゃ ちょう</rt></ruby>にいたるまで<ruby><rb>全員</rb><rt>ぜん いん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>制服</rb><rt>せい ふく</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>着</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>ている。</span>／<span class="translation">In that company, everyone from the president down to ordinary employees wears a uniform.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>この<ruby><rb>番組</rb><rt>ばん ぐみ</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>北海道</rb><rt>ほっ かい どう</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>九州</rb><rt>きゅう しゅう</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>沖縄</rb><rt>おき なわ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>至</rb><rt>いた</rt></ruby>るまで、<ruby><rb>全国</rb><rt>ぜん こく</rt></ruby>ネットでお<ruby><rb>送</rb><rt>おく</rt></ruby>りしています。</span>／<span class="translation">This program is broadcast nationwide, from Hokkaido all the way to Kyushu and Okinawa.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>当社</rb><rt>とう しゃ</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>設計</rb><rt>せっ けい</rt></ruby>・<ruby><rb>施工</rb><rt>せ こう</rt></ruby>からアフターサービスに<ruby><rb>至</rb><rt>いた</rt></ruby>るまで、みなさまの<ruby><rb>大切</rb><rt>たい せつ</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>住宅</rb><rt>じゅう たく</rt></ruby>をお<ruby><rb>世話</rb><rt>せ わ</rt></ruby>させていただきます。</span>／<span class="translation">Our company is pleased to take care of everything—from the design and construction down to the follow-up care necessary for your homes.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>一日</rb><rt>いち にち</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>過</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>ごし<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>かた</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>政治</rb><rt>せい じ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>思想</rb><rt>し そう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>至</rb><rt>いた</rt></ruby>るまで、<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>があの<ruby><rb>思想家</rb><rt>し そう か</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>影響</rb><rt>えい きょう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>受</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>けなかったものはない。</span>／<span class="translation">From the way I spend each day down to my political convictions, there is nothing in which I am not influenced by that thinker. </span></div><div class="explanation">This pattern specifies a starting point and an endpoint and expresses that the range between them is large. Has the feel of written language.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x12608"><span class="number">2. </span>Nからいうと<span class="reference">→<a href="part0155.xhtml#idtitlex1x13072">【からいう】</a></span></h2><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x12615"><span class="number">3. </span>Nからが<span class="reference">→<a href="part0787.xhtml#idtitlex1x71796">【にしてからが】</a></span></h2><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x12622"><span class="number">4. </span>Nからして<span class="reference">→<a href="part0159.xhtml#idtitlex1x13267">【からして】</a></span></h2><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x12629"><span class="number">5. </span>Nからすると<span class="reference">→<a href="part0160.xhtml#idtitlex1x13351">【からする】</a></span></h2><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x12636"><span class="number">6. </span>Nからみると<span class="reference">→<a href="part0167.xhtml#idtitlex1x13561">【からみる】</a></span></h2><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x12643"><span class="number">7. </span>...こと／...ところ　から</h2><h4 class="info">［N である　こと／ところ　から］</h4><h4 class="info">［Na である　こと／ところ　から］</h4><h4 class="info">［Na な　こと／ところ　から］</h4><h4 class="info">［A／V　こと／ところ　から］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>この<ruby><rb>魚</rb><rt>さかな</rt></ruby>は、ヘビそっくりなところから、ウミヘビという<ruby><rb>名前</rb><rt>な まえ</rt></ruby>をもつ。</span>／<span class="translation">The name of this fish is “sea snake,” because it looks just like a snake.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>カボチャは、カンボジアからやってきたと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>われているところからその<ruby><rb>名</rb><rt>な</rt></ruby>がついたそうだ。</span>／<span class="translation">I heard that the name <i>kabocha</i> (squash) is from Cambodia, where squash are said to have come from.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>車</rb><rt>くるま</rt></ruby>のバンパーから<ruby><rb>被害者</rb><rt>ひ がい しゃ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>衣服</rb><rt>い ふく</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>繊維</rb><rt>せん い</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>検出</rb><rt>けん しゅつ</rt></ruby>されたことから、その<ruby><rb>車</rb><rt>くるま</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>所有者</rb><rt>しょ ゆう しゃ</rt></ruby>にひき<ruby><rb>逃</rb><rt>に</rt></ruby>げの<ruby><rb>容疑</rb><rt>よう ぎ</rt></ruby>がかかっている。</span>／<span class="translation">Because a fiber of the victim’s clothes was detected on the fender, the owner of the car is a suspect in a hit-and-run accident.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>その<ruby><rb>人物</rb><rt>じん ぶつ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>殺害</rb><rt>さつ がい</rt></ruby>されたことを<ruby><rb>記録</rb><rt>き ろく</rt></ruby>した<ruby><rb>文書</rb><rt>ぶん しょ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>全</rb><rt>まった</rt></ruby>く<ruby><rb>存在</rb><rt>そん ざい</rt></ruby>しないところから、<ruby><rb>実</rb><rt>じつ</rt></ruby>はその<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>じん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>物</rb><rt>ぶつ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>生</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>延</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>びて<ruby><rb>大陸</rb><rt>たい りく</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>渡</rb><rt>わた</rt></ruby>ったのだという<ruby><rb>伝説</rb><rt>でん せつ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>生</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>まれたらしい。</span>／<span class="translation">From the absence of any documentation of his murder, the legend arose that he survived and crossed over to the continent.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>父親</rb><rt>ちち おや</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>中国人</rb><rt>ちゅう ごく じん</rt></ruby>であるところから、<ruby><rb>中国人</rb><rt>ちゅう ごく じん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>り<ruby><rb>合</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>いも<ruby><rb>多</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>い。</span>／<span class="translation">Because her father is Chinese, she has many Chinese friends.</span></div><div class="explanation">こと／ところ　から expresses basis or origin. When the origin of a name is expressed, as in (1) and (2), ところ is generally used more often. A formal expression used in written language.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x12697"><span class="number">8. </span>Nにしてからが<span class="reference">→<a href="part0787.xhtml#idtitlex1x71796">【にしてからが】</a></span></h2><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x12704"><span class="number">9. </span><ruby><rb>数</rb><rt>すう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>量</rb><rt>りょう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>詞</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>+から</h2><h3 class="subsubtitle" id="idsubsubtitlex1x12707"><span class="number">a. </span><ruby><rb>数</rb><rt>すう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>量</rb><rt>りょう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>詞</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>+からのN</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>その<ruby><rb>説明会</rb><rt>せつ めい かい</rt></ruby>には 1000 <ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>にん</rt></ruby>からの<ruby><rb>人々</rb><rt>ひと びと</rt></ruby>がつめかけたと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>う。</span>／<span class="translation">They say that more than a thousand people crowded in for the explanatory meeting. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>あの<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>は 3000 <ruby><rb>万</rb><rt>まん</rt></ruby>からの<ruby><rb>借金</rb><rt>しゃっ きん</rt></ruby>をかかえているそうだ。</span>／<span class="translation">I hear he has a debt of more than thirty million yen.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses “more than a certain amount,” with the implication that the amount is large. A rather formal expression.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x12732"><span class="number">b. </span><ruby><rb>数</rb><rt>すう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>量</rb><rt>りょう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>詞</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>+からある／からする</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>その<ruby><rb>遺跡</rb><rt>い せき</rt></ruby>からは、 20 キロからある<ruby><rb>金塊</rb><rt>きん かい</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>出土</rb><rt>しゅつ ど</rt></ruby>した。</span>／<span class="translation">A nugget of gold weighing twenty kilograms or more was excavated from those ruins.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>自動車</rb><rt>じ どう しゃ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>産業</rb><rt>さん ぎょう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>好調</rb><rt>こう ちょう</rt></ruby>で 300 <ruby><rb>万</rb><rt>まん</rt></ruby>からする<ruby><rb>車</rb><rt>くるま</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>飛</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>ぶように<ruby><rb>売</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>れている。</span>／<span class="translation">The automobile industry is doing well, and sales of cars priced at three million yen or more are skyrocketing.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>その<ruby><rb>種</rb><rt>しゅ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>陶器</rb><rt>とう き</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>では<ruby><rb>貴重</rb><rt>き ちょう</rt></ruby>で、<ruby><rb>小皿</rb><rt>こ ざら</rt></ruby>1<ruby><rb>枚</rb><rt>まい</rt></ruby>が 10 <ruby><rb>万</rb><rt>まん</rt></ruby>からしている。</span>／<span class="translation">That kind of pottery is now highly prized, and a small dish starts at about 100,000 yen.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses that something is approximately a certain amount, or even more. Usually からある is used for weight, length, or size, and からする is used for price.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x12763"><span class="number">10. </span>V-てから<span class="reference">→<a href="part0453.xhtml#idtitlex1x40595">【てから】</a></span></h2></body></html>