<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>かろうじて</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0174.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【かろう】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0176.xhtml">【かわきりに】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x14082">【かろうじて】</h1><div class="explanation">A formal, expression with the feel of written language. In everyday spoken language, どうにか and なんとか are often used. やっと and ようやく are similar expressions.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x14094"><span class="number">1. </span>かろうじてV-た</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>試験</rb><rt>し けん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>開始</rb><rt>かい し</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby>に、かろうじて<ruby><rb>間</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>合</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>った。</span>／<span class="translation">I barely arrived in time for the start of the exam.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>試験</rb><rt>し けん</rt></ruby>のできは<ruby><rb>良</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>くなかったが、かろうじて<ruby><rb>合格</rb><rt>ごう かく</rt></ruby>できた。</span>／<span class="translation">I did badly on the exam but somehow managed to pass it.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>雨</rb><rt>あめ</rt></ruby>でタイヤがスリップした。<ruby><rb>危</rb><rt>あぶ</rt></ruby>ないところだったが、かろうじて<ruby><rb>事故</rb><rt>じ こ</rt></ruby>はまぬがれた。</span>／<span class="translation">My car skidded because of rain. It was really dangerous, and I just avoided having an accident.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>国連</rb><rt>こく れん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>介入</rb><rt>かい にゅう</rt></ruby>で、かろうじて<ruby><rb>武力</rb><rt>ぶ りょく</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>衝突</rb><rt>しょう とつ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>避</rb><rt>さ</rt></ruby>けられた。</span>／<span class="translation">Because of the intervention of the United Nations, the use of arms was narrowly averted.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>ひどい<ruby><rb>怪我</rb><rt>け が</rt></ruby>だったが、かろうじて<ruby><rb>死</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>なずにすんだ。</span>／<span class="translation">It was a terrible injury, and I narrowly escaped death.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “barely” or “narrowly managing to do something.” Used when a good result is achieved or the worst situation is avoided. Used in the forms かろうじて...をまぬがれた, かろうじて...せずにすんだ, and かろうじて...は避けられた.</div><div class="explanation">やっと has the implication that a long time or great trouble is needed to achieve a result. On the other hand, with かろうじて a process is not always necessary, and the result is the important point. It is more formal than やっと and used in written language.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x14147"><span class="number">2. </span>かろうじてV-ている</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>毎日</rb><rt>まい にち</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>生活</rb><rt>せい かつ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>苦</rb><rt>くる</rt></ruby>しいが、かろうじて<ruby><rb>借金</rb><rt>しゃっ きん</rt></ruby>はせずに<ruby><rb>済</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>んでいる。</span>／<span class="translation">Everyday life is hard, and I just manage to get by without borrowing money.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>病人</rb><rt>びょう にん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>機械</rb><rt>き かい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>力</rb><rt>ちから</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>借</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>りて、かろうじて<ruby><rb>生</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>きている。</span>／<span class="translation">The patient is on life support, barely alive.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>現代人</rb><rt>げん だい じん</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>毎日</rb><rt>まい にち</rt></ruby>のストレスに<ruby><rb>耐</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>えて、かろうじてバランスを<ruby><rb>保</rb><rt>たも</rt></ruby>っているに<ruby><rb>過</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>ぎない。</span>／<span class="translation">People today are only just managing to endure the stress of everyday life and make ends meet.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>も、かろうじて<ruby><rb>涙</rb><rt>なみだ</rt></ruby>をこらえているようだった。</span>／<span class="translation">She also seemed to be fighting back tears.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses “barely managing” or “accomplishing something with difficulty.” Used when conditions are bad, but the worst outcome is avoided and the present condition can be maintained with difficulty, as in (1)-(3). Also used when the present condition is maintained by great effort or trouble, as in (4). The meaning of (4) is that she is almost crying but refrains from it with effort.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x14184"><span class="number">3. </span>かろうじてV-るN</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>この<ruby><rb>道</rb><rt>みち</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>車</rb><rt>くるま</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>二台</rb><rt>に だい</rt></ruby>がかろうじてすれ<ruby><rb>違</rb><rt>ちが</rt></ruby>える<ruby><rb>広</rb><rt>ひろ</rt></ruby>さしかない。</span>／<span class="translation">This road is just wide enough to let two cars pass each other.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>列車</rb><rt>れっ しゃ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>寝台</rb><rt>しん だい</rt></ruby>というのは、<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>ひとりが、かろうじて<ruby><rb>横</rb><rt>よこ</rt></ruby>になれる<ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>きさだ。</span>／<span class="translation">The berth in the train is barely big enough for a person to lie down.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>その<ruby><rb>家</rb><rt>いえ</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>僕</rb><rt>ぼく</rt></ruby>にもかろうじて<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>えそうな<ruby><rb>値段</rb><rt>ね だん</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">The price of that house is at the limit of what I can afford.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>英語</rb><rt>えい ご</rt></ruby>は、かろうじて<ruby><rb>日常</rb><rt>にち じょう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>会話</rb><rt>かい わ</rt></ruby>ができる<ruby><rb>程度</rb><rt>てい ど</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">My English ability is barely enough for daily conversation.</span></div><div class="explanation">With expressions of potentiality, as in (1) to (4), かろうじて means “someone somehow manages to achieve something.” Used when something is difficult to do, but someone just barely can do it, with no margin to spare.</div></body></html>