<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ならびに</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0711.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ならない】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0713.xhtml">【なり<sub class="variation">1</sub>】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x66343">【ならびに】</h1><h4 class="info">［NならびにN］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>各国</rb><rt>かっ こく</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>首相</rb><rt>しゅ しょう</rt></ruby>ならびに<ruby><rb>外相</rb><rt>がい しょう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>式典</rb><rt>しき てん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>参列</rb><rt>さん れつ</rt></ruby>した。</span>／<span class="translation">Premiers and foreign ministers from every country attended the ceremony.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>この<ruby><rb>美術館</rb><rt>び じゅつ かん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>主</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>東欧</rb><rt>とう おう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>絵画</rb><rt>かい が</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>並</rb><rt>なら</rt></ruby>びに<ruby><rb>工芸品</rb><rt>こう げい ひん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>所蔵</rb><rt>しょ ぞう</rt></ruby>している。</span>／<span class="translation">This museum has a collection of mainly paintings and handicrafts from Eastern Europe.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>本日</rb><rt>ほん じつ</rt></ruby>ご<ruby><rb>出席</rb><rt>しゅっ せき</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>卒業生</rb><rt>そつ ぎょう せい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>諸君</rb><rt>しょ くん</rt></ruby>ならびに<ruby><rb>御家族</rb><rt>ご か ぞく</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>皆</rb><rt>みな</rt></ruby>さま<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>がた</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>心</rb><rt>こころ</rt></ruby>からお<ruby><rb>祝</rb><rt>いわ</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>申</rb><rt>もう</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>げます。</span>／<span class="translation">I offer my sincere congratulations to both the graduates and their families who  are attending this ceremony today.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>優勝者</rb><rt>ゆう しょう しゃ</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>賞状</rb><rt>しょう じょう</rt></ruby>ならびに<ruby><rb>記念品</rb><rt>き ねん ひん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>手渡</rb><rt>て わた</rt></ruby>されることになっている。</span>／<span class="translation">The champion will be handed both a certificate and a trophy.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>用紙</rb><rt>よう し</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>住所</rb><rt>じゅう しょ</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>氏名</rb><rt>し めい</rt></ruby>ならびに<ruby><rb>生年月日</rb><rt>せい ねん がっ ぴ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>記入</rb><rt>き にゅう</rt></ruby>して<ruby><rb>下</rb><rt>くだ</rt></ruby>さい。</span>／<span class="translation">Please fill in your address, name, and date of birth on the form.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to add a new N (thing/person) similar to the preceding N. Formal expression mainly used in written language. Also used in formal speech such as an address at a ceremony.</div></body></html>