<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>お...いただく</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0080.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【お...いたす】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0082.xhtml">【お...ください】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x7615">【お...いただく】</h1><h4 class="info">［おR-いただく］</h4><h4 class="info">［ごNいただく］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>今日</rb><rt>きょう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>遠</rb><rt>とお</rt></ruby>いところをわざわざお<ruby><rb>集</rb><rt>あつ</rt></ruby>まりいただきましてありがとうございます。</span>／<span class="translation">Thank you very much for coming all the way here today.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>ここにお<ruby><rb>名前</rb><rt>な まえ</rt></ruby>とご<ruby><rb>住所</rb><rt>じゅう しょ</rt></ruby>をお<ruby><rb>書</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>きいただいて、あちらの<ruby><rb>窓口</rb><rt>まど ぐち</rt></ruby>へお<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>だ</rt></ruby>しください。</span>／<span class="translation">Please fill in your name and address here, and take it to the teller’s window over there. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>お<ruby><rb>忙</rb><rt>いそが</rt></ruby>しいのにご<ruby><rb>連絡</rb><rt>れん らく</rt></ruby>いただき、まことに<ruby><rb>恐縮</rb><rt>きょう しゅく</rt></ruby>しております。</span>／<span class="translation">Thank you so much for contacting me even though you are so busy.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>ご<ruby><rb>住職</rb><rt>じゅう しょく</rt></ruby>にご<ruby><rb>教示</rb><rt>きょう じ</rt></ruby>いただいた<ruby><rb>禅</rb><rt>ぜん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>心</rb><rt>こころ</rt></ruby>を、これからは<ruby><rb>生活</rb><rt>せい かつ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>中</rb><rt>なか</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>実践</rb><rt>じっ せん</rt></ruby>していきたいと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>います。</span>／<span class="translation">What I have learned from the master about the spirit of Zen, I will put into practice from now on in my daily life.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>《<ruby><rb>案内状</rb><rt>あん ない じょう</rt></ruby>》<ruby><rb>先生</rb><rt>せん せい</rt></ruby>にはぜひご<ruby><rb>出席</rb><rt>しゅっ せき</rt></ruby>いただきたく、お<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>らせ<ruby><rb>申</rb><rt>もう</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>げます。</span>／<span class="translation">《in a written invitation to a teacher》This is to let you know about this event, with the sincere hope that you will be able to attend.</span></div><div class="explanation">お...いただくis used with a verb stem or a noun of Chinese origin that indicates an act. Although it is a humble expression, like ていただく, it is more polite and formal than the latter. In the case of action nouns of Chinese origin, such as 連絡(する), 教示(する), and 出席(する) in (3), (4), and (5), ごNいただくis usually used. However, in the case of 電話(する), お電話いただく is used. </div></body></html>