<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>いっぽう</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0063.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【いったん...と】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0065.xhtml">【いない】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x5951">【いっぽう】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x5953"><span class="number">1. </span>いっぽう</h2><h3 class="subsubtitle" id="idsubsubtitlex1x5956"><span class="number">a. </span>V-る+いっぽう（で）</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>自分</rb><rt>じ ぶん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>をこなす<ruby><rb>一方</rb><rt>いっ ぽう</rt></ruby>で、<ruby><rb>部下</rb><rt>ぶ か</rt></ruby>のめんどうも<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>なければならない。</span>／<span class="translation">On the one hand I do my own work, but on the other I also have to take care of my subordinates.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>全面的</rb><rt>ぜん めん てき</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>協力</rb><rt>きょう りょく</rt></ruby>すると<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>う<ruby><rb>一方</rb><rt>いっ ぽう</rt></ruby>、こちらが<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なに</rt></ruby>か<ruby><rb>頼</rb><rt>たの</rt></ruby>んでも<ruby><rb>忙</rb><rt>いそが</rt></ruby>しいからと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>って<ruby><rb>断</rb><rt>ことわ</rt></ruby>ってくる。</span>／<span class="translation">Even though he says he will cooperate fully with us, he refuses our requests, saying he is busy. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>はお<ruby><rb>金</rb><rt>かね</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>困</rb><rt>こま</rt></ruby>っていると<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>う<ruby><rb>一方</rb><rt>いっ ぽう</rt></ruby>で、ずいぶん<ruby><rb>無駄遣</rb><rt>む だ づか</rt></ruby>いもしているらしい。</span>／<span class="translation">I heard that she says she is strapped for money, yet she seems to waste a lot of it. </span></div><div class="explanation">いっぽう means “doing one thing in parallel with another” and is followed by an expression of the second activity. </div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x5987"><span class="number">b. </span>いっぽうでは...たほうでは</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>この<ruby><rb>映画</rb><rt>えい が</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>一方</rb><rt>いっ ぽう</rt></ruby>では<ruby><rb>今年</rb><rt>ことし</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>最高</rb><rt>さい こう</rt></ruby>との<ruby><rb>高</rb><rt>たか</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>評価</rb><rt>ひょう か</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>受</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>けていながら、<ruby><rb>他方</rb><rt>た ほう</rt></ruby>ではひどい<ruby><rb>出来</rb><rt>で き</rt></ruby>だと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>われている。</span>／<span class="translation">This movie received some good reviews as the best of this year, but on the other hand, it was also said to be very badly made.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>一方</rb><rt>いっ ぽう</rt></ruby>では<ruby><rb>女性</rb><rt>じょ せい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>社会</rb><rt>しゃ かい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>進出</rb><rt>しん しゅつ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>喜</rb><rt>よろこ</rt></ruby>ぶべきことだと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>い、<ruby><rb>他方</rb><rt>た ほう</rt></ruby>では<ruby><rb>女子</rb><rt>じょ し</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>社員</rb><rt>しゃ いん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>早</rb><rt>はや</rt></ruby>く<ruby><rb>結婚</rb><rt>けっ こん</rt></ruby>して<ruby><rb>退職</rb><rt>たい しょく</rt></ruby>した<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>ほう</rt></ruby>がいいと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>う。</span>／<span class="translation">He says, on the one hand, that it’s a good thing for women to take part in society, but on the other hand, he also says female employees should get married early and then quit working.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>一方</rb><rt>いっ ぽう</rt></ruby>ではボランティア<ruby><rb>活動</rb><rt>かつ どう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>大事</rb><rt>だい じ</rt></ruby>だと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>っているが、<ruby><rb>他方</rb><rt>た ほう</rt></ruby>では<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なに</rt></ruby>かと<ruby><rb>理由</rb><rt>り ゆう</rt></ruby>をつけて<ruby><rb>参加</rb><rt>さん か</rt></ruby>するのを<ruby><rb>避</rb><rt>さ</rt></ruby>けている。</span>／<span class="translation">On the one hand she says volunteer activities are very important, but on the other hand, she always has excuses to avoid joining in.  </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>政治</rb><rt>せい じ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>対</rb><rt>たい</rt></ruby>する<ruby><rb>関心</rb><rt>かん しん</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>一方</rb><rt>いっ ぽう</rt></ruby>では<ruby><rb>高</rb><rt>たか</rt></ruby>まっているものの、<ruby><rb>他方</rb><rt>た ほう</rt></ruby>では<ruby><rb>腐敗</rb><rt>ふ はい</rt></ruby>しきった<ruby><rb>政府</rb><rt>せい ふ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>対</rb><rt>たい</rt></ruby>する<ruby><rb>諦</rb><rt>あきら</rt></ruby>めのムードがまん<ruby><rb>延</rb><rt>えん</rt></ruby>している。</span>／<span class="translation">On the one hand interest in politics is growing, but on the other hand, a mood of resignation is spreading with regard to the government, which is totally corrupt. </span></div><div class="explanation">Describes two opposing matters in parallel. In many cases, いっぽうでは... is followed by a contradictory conjunction such as が, のに, ながら, or ものの. </div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x6024"><span class="number">c. </span>いっぽう</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>花子</rb><rt>はな こ</rt></ruby>はみんなが<ruby><rb>帰</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>ったあとも<ruby><rb>毎日</rb><rt>まい にち</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>残業</rb><rt>ざん ぎょう</rt></ruby>していた。<ruby><rb>一方</rb><rt>いっ ぽう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>桃子</rb><rt>もも こ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>定時</rb><rt>てい じ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>退社</rb><rt>たいしゃ</rt></ruby>し、<ruby><rb>毎晩</rb><rt>まいばん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>遊</rb><rt>あそ</rt></ruby>び<ruby><rb>回</rb><rt>まわ</rt></ruby>っていた。</span>／<span class="translation">Every day Hanako worked overtime after everyone left. On the other hand, Momoko left the office on time and went out gallivanting every night.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>日本</rb><rt>に ほん</rt></ruby>では<ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>生</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>まない<ruby><rb>女性</rb><rt>じょ せい</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>増</rb><rt>ふ</rt></ruby>えている。<ruby><rb>一方</rb><rt>いっ ぽう</rt></ruby>アメリカでは、<ruby><rb>結婚</rb><rt>けっ こん</rt></ruby>しなくても<ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>はほしいという<ruby><rb>女性</rb><rt>じょ せい</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>増</rb><rt>ふ</rt></ruby>えている。</span>／<span class="translation">In Japan, the number of women who aren’t having children is increasing. In contrast, in America the number of women who want to have children without getting married is increasing.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used at the beginning of a sentence or clause. その一方で can be used instead of いっぽう.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>土地の値下がりは現状を見ると絶望的だが、その一方で期待できる点もないわけではない。／With respect to the fall in land prices, the present situation appears hopeless, but at the same time, there are some encouraging signs.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x6058"><span class="number">2. </span>V-るいっぽうだ</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>事態</rb><rt>じ たい</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>悪</rb><rt>わる</rt></ruby>くなる<ruby><rb>一方</rb><rt>いっ ぽう</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">The situation is getting worse and worse.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>父</rb><rt>ちち</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>病状</rb><rt>びょう じょう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>悪化</rb><rt>あっ か</rt></ruby>する<ruby><rb>一方</rb><rt>いっ ぽう</rt></ruby>だった。</span>／<span class="translation">My father’s condition kept getting worse.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>忙</rb><rt>いそが</rt></ruby>しくなる<ruby><rb>一方</rb><rt>いっ ぽう</rt></ruby>で、このままだといつかは<ruby><rb>倒</rb><rt>たお</rt></ruby>れてしまいそうだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Work is getting busier and busier, and at this rate I can see myself collapsing someday.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>最近</rb><rt>さい きん</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>円</rb><rt>えん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>値上</rb><rt>ね あ</rt></ruby>がりする<ruby><rb>一方</rb><rt>いっ ぽう</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">Recently, the Japanese yen has been rising higher and higher.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses a situation that is rapidly progressing in a certain direction and cannot be stopped. Often used about negative things. </div></body></html>