<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>めったに</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0973.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【めぐって】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0975.xhtml">【も】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x94590">【めったに】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x94592"><span class="number">1. </span>めったに...ない</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>酒</rb><rt>さけ</rt></ruby>はめったに<ruby><rb>飲</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>まない。</span>／<span class="translation">I seldom drink alcohol.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>うちの<ruby><rb>子</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>丈夫</rb><rt>じょう ぶ</rt></ruby>でめったに<ruby><rb>病気</rb><rt>びょう き</rt></ruby>もしない。</span>／<span class="translation">Our child is in good health and rarely gets sick.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>人混</rb><rt>ひと ご</rt></ruby>みは<ruby><rb>好</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>きではないので、<ruby><rb>東京</rb><rt>とう きょう</rt></ruby>や<ruby><rb>大阪</rb><rt>おお さか</rt></ruby>などの<ruby><rb>大都市</rb><rt>だい と し</rt></ruby>にはめったに<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>かない。</span>／<span class="translation">I don’t like crowds of people and so I rarely go to big cities like Tokyo or Osaka.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>この<ruby><rb>頃</rb><rt>ごろ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>機械</rb><rt>き かい</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>優秀</rb><rt>ゆう しゅう</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>故障</rb><rt>こ しょう</rt></ruby>はめったにない。</span>／<span class="translation">Appliances these days are well-made and so rarely break down.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>わが<ruby><rb>家</rb><rt>や</rt></ruby>はずいぶん<ruby><rb>田舎</rb><rt>いなか</rt></ruby>にあるので、お<ruby><rb>客</rb><rt>きゃく</rt></ruby>がやって<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>ることはめったにない。</span>／<span class="translation">Our house is in a pretty rural area, so we rarely have guests dropping by. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>学生</rb><rt>がく せい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>時代</rb><rt>じ だい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>友人</rb><rt>ゆう じん</rt></ruby>とも<ruby><rb>遠</rb><rt>とお</rt></ruby>く<ruby><rb>離</rb><rt>はな</rt></ruby>れてしまって、めったに<ruby><rb>会</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>うこともない。</span>／<span class="translation">I rarely meet friends from my university days because we live so far apart.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（7）</span><ruby><rb>近頃</rb><rt>ちか ごろ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>町中</rb><rt>まち なか</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>野生</rb><rt>や せい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>小動物</rb><rt>しょう どう ぶつ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>かけるようなこともめったになくなった。</span>／<span class="translation">Nowadays you rarely catch sight of small wild animals in town anymore.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses that the frequency with which something is done is extremely low. Often used in the form めったにV-ない, as in examples (1) - (3), or in the form ...はめったにない, as in examples (4) and (5). </div><div class="explanation">たまに also expresses low frequency, but the point of emphasis is different. For example, both (1) and (2) below mean “alcohol is consumed very infrequently” but the めったに...ない in example (1) emphasizes the low frequency. In contrast, たまに in example (2) expresses that, although the frequency is low, it does take place.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例1）</span>私は酒はめったに飲みません。／I rarely drink alcohol.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例2）</span>私は酒は嫌いですが、友だちに誘われたときなど、たまには飲むこともあります。／I don’t like alcohol but, when I am invited by a friend, for example, I occasionally do drink it.</div><div class="explanation">For these phrases, frequency decreases in this order: あまり...ない &gt; ほとんど／めったに...ない &gt; ぜんぜん／まったく...ない.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x94685"><span class="number">2. </span>めったな</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>めったなことで<ruby><rb>驚</rb><rt>おどろ</rt></ruby>かない<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>も、そのときばかりはさすがにうろたえてしまった。</span>／<span class="translation">I am usually not surprised by things, but even so, I lost my cool just at that moment.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>山下</rb><rt>やま した</rt></ruby>さんが<ruby><rb>盗</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>ったんじゃない？</span>／<span class="translation">Didn’t Yamashita-san steal it?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>しっ。<ruby><rb>証拠</rb><rt>しょう こ</rt></ruby>もないのに、めったなことを<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>うもんじゃないよ。</span>／<span class="translation">Shh! There’s no evidence of that, so don’t say such things.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>この<ruby><rb>機械</rb><rt>き かい</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>丈夫</rb><rt>じょう ぶ</rt></ruby>ですから、めったなことでは<ruby><rb>故障</rb><rt>こ しょう</rt></ruby>しません。</span>／<span class="translation">This appliance is so durable it hardly ever breaks down.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>このことは、めったな<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はな</rt></ruby>してはいけない。</span>／<span class="translation">You shouldn’t talk of this to just anyone.</span></div><div class="explanation">An idiomatic expression. Used in the form of めったなことで（は）...ない, it expresses that “unless there is a set of extreme circumstance/conditions, the event/action in question does not take place.” Example (1) means “generally not surprised, can take most things calmly” and (2) means “it is wrong to say irresponsible/imprudent things.”</div><div class="explanation">Use of the form めったなN, as in example (4), is becoming rare. Means “it is wrong to talk (of this) to people other than a select (few/group).” </div></body></html>