<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>なんという</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0730.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【なんと】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0732.xhtml">【なんとか】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x68608">【なんという】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x68610"><span class="number">1. </span>なんというN</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>あの<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>という<ruby><rb>名前</rb><rt>な まえ</rt></ruby>ですか。</span>／<span class="translation">What is the name of that person?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>その<ruby><rb>赤</rb><rt>あか</rt></ruby>いのは<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>という<ruby><rb>花</rb><rt>はな</rt></ruby>ですか。</span>／<span class="translation">What is the name of that red flower?</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to ask for a name of a thing/person. In casual speech, it can be なんていうN.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x68635"><span class="number">2. </span>なんという+<ruby><rb>連</rb><rt>れん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>体</rb><rt>たい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>修</rb><rt>しゅう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>飾</rb><rt>しょく</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>句</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>+N</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>なんという<ruby><rb>馬鹿</rb><rt>ば か</rt></ruby>なやつだ。</span>／<span class="translation">What a fool he is!</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>若</rb><rt>わか</rt></ruby>いのになんという<ruby><rb>冷静</rb><rt>れい せい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>沈着</rb><rt>ちんちゃく</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>人物</rb><rt>じん ぶつ</rt></ruby>なのだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">What a cool-headed person for her age!</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>練習</rb><rt>れん しゅう</rt></ruby>がつらいならやめてしまえだなんて、なんという<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>いやりのないことを<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ってしまったのだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">How thoughtless of me to say to just quit if the practice was too hard. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>たちまで<ruby><rb>皆殺</rb><rt>みな ごろ</rt></ruby>しにするなんて<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>という<ruby><rb>残虐</rb><rt>ざん ぎゃく</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>奴</rb><rt>やつ</rt></ruby>らだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">How cruel they are to kill everyone including children!</span></div><div class="explanation">Followed by a noun which is modified by a clause or phrase, なんというN is used to express the speaker’s exclamation towards a thing/person/state with which <span class="noSeparate">s/he</span> is surprised or amazed, or a thing/person/state which <span class="noSeparate">s/he</span> admires. なんという often appears in the expression なんという...のだろう.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x68672"><span class="number">3. </span>なんというNだ</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>こんな<ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>きな<ruby><rb>石</rb><rt>いし</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>一人</rb><rt>ひとり</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>持</rb><rt>も</rt></ruby>ち<ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>げられるなんて、<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>という<ruby><rb>男</rb><rt>おとこ</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">What a man he is to be able to lift a big rock like this!</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>一瞬</rb><rt>いっ しゅん</rt></ruby>のうちにして、<ruby><rb>家族</rb><rt>か ぞく</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>全部</rb><rt>ぜん ぶ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>失</rb><rt>うしな</rt></ruby>ってしまうなんて、なんということだ。</span>／<span class="translation">What a tragedy it is to lose all her family members in a matter of seconds!</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>ということだろう。<ruby><rb>月</rb><rt>つき</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>真</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>っ<ruby><rb>赤</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>染</rb><rt>そ</rt></ruby>まっている。</span>／<span class="translation">How amazing! The moon has turned red.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>外国</rb><rt>がい こく</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>同</rb><rt>おな</rt></ruby>じバスに<ruby><rb>乗</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>りあわせるなんて、<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>という<ruby><rb>偶然</rb><rt>ぐう ぜん</rt></ruby>だろう。</span>／<span class="translation">What a coincidence to be seated on the same bus as you in a foreign country!</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to express the speaker’s exclamation about something <span class="noSeparate">s/he</span> is surprised with, amazed with, or in admiration of.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x68709"><span class="number">4. </span>なんということもない</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>ということもなく、<ruby><rb>毎日</rb><rt>まい にち</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>穏</rb><rt>おだ</rt></ruby>やかに<ruby><rb>過</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>ぎて<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>く。</span>／<span class="translation">Every day passes peacefully with nothing out of the ordinary.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>特</rb><rt>とく</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>ということもない<ruby><rb>平凡</rb><rt>へい ぼん</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>人間</rb><rt>にん げん</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">I am an ordinary person with no special ability.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses the meaning that there is nothing remarkable to speak of.</div></body></html>