<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>との</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0611.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【とにかく】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0613.xhtml">【とは】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x58126">【との】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x58128"><span class="number">1. </span>...とのことだ</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>みなさんによろしくとのことでした。</span>／<span class="translation">He said to give his regards to everyone. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>無事</rb><rt>ぶ じ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>大学</rb><rt>だい がく</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>合格</rb><rt>ごう かく</rt></ruby>なされたとのこと、まことにおめでとうございます。</span>／<span class="translation">I heard that you passed your university entrance exams—sincere congratulations on your success!</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>社長</rb><rt>しゃ ちょう</rt></ruby>はすこし<ruby><rb>遅</rb><rt>おく</rt></ruby>れるので、<ruby><rb>会議</rb><rt>かい ぎ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>始</rb><rt>はじ</rt></ruby>めておいてくれとのことでした。</span>／<span class="translation">The company president will be a little late, so she said we should start the meeting without her. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>そちらは、<ruby><rb>寒</rb><rt>さむ</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>日</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>続</rb><rt>つづ</rt></ruby>いているとのことですが、<ruby><rb>皆様</rb><rt>みな さま</rt></ruby>お<ruby><rb>変</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>わりありませんか。</span>／<span class="translation">I hear that you have been having a cold spell—how is everyone doing?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>あの<ruby><rb>二人</rb><rt>ふたり</rt></ruby>も、<ruby><rb>長</rb><rt>なが</rt></ruby>かった<ruby><rb>婚約</rb><rt>こん やく</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>終止符</rb><rt>しゅう し ふ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>打</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>ち、6<ruby><rb>月</rb><rt>がつ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>挙式</rb><rt>きょ しき</rt></ruby>するとのこと。</span>／<span class="translation">I hear that those two are bringing their long engagement to a close and getting married in June. </span></div><div class="explanation">Means “I hear/they say that....” Used by the speaker to say something that <span class="noSeparate">s/he</span> has heard or learned from another person. As in (2) and (5), sometimes だ is dropped and the clause or sentence ends with こと. May take the <i>ta-</i>form, as in とのことだった／でした (I heard/they said that...). Cannot be used in the negative form.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x58174"><span class="number">2. </span>...とのN</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>恩師</rb><rt>おん し</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>結婚式</rb><rt>けっ こん しき</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>出席</rb><rt>しゅっ せき</rt></ruby>できないとの<ruby><rb>返事</rb><rt>へん じ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>受</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>け<ruby><rb>取</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>った。</span>／<span class="translation">I received a reply from my mentor that she won’t be able to attend the wedding. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>学生</rb><rt>がく せい</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>留学</rb><rt>りゅう がく</rt></ruby>するため<ruby><rb>一年</rb><rt>いち ねん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>休学</rb><rt>きゅう がく</rt></ruby>させてほしいとの<ruby><rb>希望</rb><rt>き ぼう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>だ</rt></ruby>されている。</span>／<span class="translation">The student has submitted a request for a year's leave of absence in order to study abroad. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>この<ruby><rb>件</rb><rt>けん</rt></ruby>については、<ruby><rb>次回</rb><rt>じ かい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>審議</rb><rt>しん ぎ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>回</rb><rt>まわ</rt></ruby>してはどうかとの<ruby><rb>議長</rb><rt>ぎ ちょう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>提案</rb><rt>てい あん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>全員</rb><rt>ぜん いん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>賛成</rb><rt>さん せい</rt></ruby>した。</span>／<span class="translation">Everyone agreed to the proposal made by the chair for deliberation on this matter to be tabled until the next meeting. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>来月</rb><rt>らい げつ</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>一年間</rb><rt>いち ねん かん</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>札幌</rb><rt>さっ ぽろ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>支社</rb><rt>し しゃ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>出向</rb><rt>しゅっ こう</rt></ruby>せよとの<ruby><rb>辞令</rb><rt>じ れい</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>受</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>けた。</span>／<span class="translation">I’ve received an official notice that I’ll be reassigned to our branch office in Sapporo for a year, starting next month. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>文部</rb><rt>もん ぶ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>大臣</rb><rt>だい じん</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>学校</rb><rt>がっ こう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>教育</rb><rt>きょう いく</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>改善</rb><rt>かい ぜん</rt></ruby>するためには、<ruby><rb>高等</rb><rt>こうとう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>教育</rb><rt>きょう いく</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>機関</rb><rt>き かん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>入学</rb><rt>にゅう がく</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>試験</rb><rt>し けん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>制度</rb><rt>せい ど</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>抜本的</rb><rt>ばっぽんてき</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>改革</rb><rt>かいかく</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>必要</rb><rt>ひつ よう</rt></ruby>だとの<ruby><rb>見解</rb><rt>けん かい</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>述</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>べた。</span>／<span class="translation">The Minister of Education has stated his view that, in order to improve formal education, a drastic overhaul of the entrance examination system for institutions of higher education is necessary. </span></div><div class="explanation">In the pattern ...とのN, a clause that describes the content of a certain linguistic expression or thought is used to modify a noun. Used in formal style. The N slot is filled by a noun that denotes either a speech activity, such as 手紙 (letter), 返事 (reply), 依頼 (request), 提案 (proposal), 警告 (warning), or 命令 (order), or a thought activity, such as 意見 (opinion), 見解 (viewpoint), 考え (idea), or 希望 (hope). Used when talking about something that another person has said or thought. When the speaker’s own thoughts are being expressed, usually the form という is used instead of との, as below.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>私は夫婦別姓を合法化すべきだという意見をもっている。／I am of the opinion that the use of different surnames by married couples should be legalized. </div></body></html>