<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ぶる</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0913.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ぶり】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0915.xhtml">【ぶん】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x84601">【ぶる】</h1><h4 class="info">［N／Na　ぶる］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>通</rb><rt>つう</rt></ruby>ぶってフランスの<ruby><rb>上等</rb><rt>じょう とう</rt></ruby>なワインしか<ruby><rb>飲</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>まない。</span>／<span class="translation">He pretends to be a connoisseur by drinking only expensive French wine.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>父</rb><rt>ちち</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>学者</rb><rt>がく しゃ</rt></ruby>ぶって<ruby><rb>解説</rb><rt>かい せつ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>始</rb><rt>はじ</rt></ruby>めた。</span>／<span class="translation">My father started explaining as though he were an expert. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>あの<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>上品</rb><rt>じょう ひん</rt></ruby>ぶってはいるが、たいした<ruby><rb>家柄</rb><rt>いえ がら</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>ではない。</span>／<span class="translation">She tries to look posh, but in fact she isn’t from a family of any consequence. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>はもったいぶってなかなか<ruby><rb>教</rb><rt>おし</rt></ruby>えてくれない。</span>／<span class="translation">He is so pompous that he wouldn’t part with the information readily.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>三年生</rb><rt>さん ねん せい</rt></ruby>になった<ruby><rb>長女</rb><rt>ちょう じょ</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>先輩</rb><rt>せん ぱい</rt></ruby>ぶって<ruby><rb>一年生</rb><rt>いち ねん せい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>妹</rb><rt>いもうと</rt></ruby>にいろいろ<ruby><rb>教</rb><rt>おし</rt></ruby>えたりしている。</span>／<span class="translation">The eldest daughter is now in the third grade and helps her little first grade sister like a true upperclassman.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means that someone behaves in a manner that is typical of the role the person is emulating.  Often used in the context of いかにもたいした...である (behaving as if the person is a “real someone/something”). As in the cases of (1) - (3), it often shows the speaker’s negative evaluation of someone who “behaves as though he is X” or who is pretentious and makes a fuss over something minor. In (4), もったいぶって is an idiomatic phrase that means “affected, putting on airs” and is used in conjunction with phrases such as なかなか教えない／言わない. It has limited usage.</div></body></html>