<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>なくてはいけない</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0675.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【なくては】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0677.xhtml">【なくてはならない】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x62467">【なくてはいけない】</h1><h4 class="info">［N／Na　でなくてはいけない］</h4><h4 class="info">［A-くなくてはいけない］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-なくてはいけない］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>履歴書</rb><rt>り れき しょ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>自筆</rb><rt>じ ひつ</rt></ruby>のものでなくてはいけない。</span>／<span class="translation">Your resume has to be handwritten.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>教師</rb><rt>きょう し</rt></ruby>はどの<ruby><rb>生徒</rb><rt>せい と</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>対</rb><rt>たい</rt></ruby>しても<ruby><rb>公正</rb><rt>こう せい</rt></ruby>でなくてはならない。</span>／<span class="translation">Teachers have to be fair to every single student.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>家族</rb><rt>か ぞく</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>住</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>むにはもう<ruby><rb>少</rb><rt>すこ</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>広</rb><rt>ひろ</rt></ruby>くなくてはだめだ。</span>／<span class="translation">If a family is going to live here, it needs to be a little more spacious.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>目上</rb><rt>め うえ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はな</rt></ruby>す<ruby><rb>時</rb><rt>とき</rt></ruby>はことばづかいに<ruby><rb>気</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>をつけなくてはいけない。</span>／<span class="translation">You must be careful with the way you speak when you speak to a superior.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>家族</rb><rt>か ぞく</rt></ruby>のために<ruby><rb>働</rb><rt>はたら</rt></ruby>かなくてはならない。</span>／<span class="translation">I have to work for the sake of my family.</span></div><div class="explanation">This expression takes the forms V-なくてはいけない／ならない／だめだ and means that generally it is “obligatory” or “necessary” to do a certain action or to be a certain way. In spoken Japanese, なくては may be contracted to なく(っ)ちゃ and the latter part いけない／ならない／だめだ may be omitted, as below. </div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>もっとまじめに勉強しなくちゃだめだよ。／You’ve got to study harder.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>もう行かなくちゃ。／I've gotta go now.</div><div class="explanation">Regarding the difference between なくてはいけない and なくてはならない, see なければ (Usage 2).</div></body></html>