<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ないことはない</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0647.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ないかな】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0649.xhtml">【ないこともない】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x60546">【ないことはない】</h1><h4 class="info">［V-ないことはない］</h4><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><span class="number">A:</span>とても<ruby><rb>明日</rb><rt>あ す</rt></ruby>までには<ruby><rb>終</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>わりそうにないんですけど...。</span>／<span class="translation">There doesn’t seem to be any way for me to finish this by tomorrow....</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>いや、やる<ruby><rb>気</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>があればできないことはありませんよ。</span>／<span class="translation">Well, if you are motivated enough, it’s not impossible.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>ないんじゃないか。</span>／<span class="translation">She isn’t coming, is she?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span><ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>ないことはないと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>うよ。<ruby><rb>遅</rb><rt>おく</rt></ruby>れても<ruby><rb>必</rb><rt>かなら</rt></ruby>ず<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>ると<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>っていたから。</span>／<span class="translation">I don’t think she’s not coming. She said she’d come for sure, although she might be late.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><span class="number">A:</span>1<ruby><rb>週間</rb><rt>しゅう かん</rt></ruby>でできますか。</span>／<span class="translation">Can you do this in a week?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>できないことはないですが、かなり<ruby><rb>頑張</rb><rt>がん ば</rt></ruby>らないと<ruby><rb>難</rb><rt>むずか</rt></ruby>しいですね。</span>／<span class="translation">It’s not totally impossible, but unless I try really hard, it’ll be difficult.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>きたくないの？</span>／<span class="translation">Don’t you want to go?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span><ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>きたくないことはないけど、あまり<ruby><rb>気</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>がすすまないんだ。</span>／<span class="translation">It’s not that I don’t want to go, but I can’t say I’m very enthusiastic about it.</span></div><div class="explanation">ないことはない is used in response to a statement an interlocutor has made, either to deny the statement completely, with the meaning “that is not at all the case,” or to defer making a firm judgment, with the meaning “that is partly true/possible, but not necessarily 100% so.” (1) and (2) are instances of the former use, and (3) and (4) of the latter.</div><div class="explanation">More precisely, in (1) B responds to A’s negative statement, which means “I can’t do this,” by saying, “it’s not impossible for you to do it,” implying that B thinks A actually can do it. On the other hand, in (3), B’s response means “I can do it, but I won’t guarantee it,” which implies “there is a possibility that I can’t do it.”</div><div class="explanation">The latter usage of ないことはない (above) can be rephrased as ないこともない. However, this is not possible for the former usage.</div></body></html>