<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>なら2</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0706.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【なら<sub class="variation">1</sub>】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0708.xhtml">【なら<sub class="variation">3</sub>】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x65111">【なら<sub class="variation">2</sub>】</h1><h4 class="info">［N／Na　なら］</h4><h4 class="info">［N／Na　だった（の）なら］</h4><h4 class="info">［A-い／A-かった　（の）なら］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-る／V-た　（の）なら］</h4><div class="explanation">When combined with the dictionary form or the <i>ta-</i>form of a predicate, なら expresses the meaning “if the actual situation or circumstances were like that.” The forms のならば, のなら, and ならば are also used. In spoken Japanese, の often becomes ん.</div><div class="explanation">Although there is often no clear difference in meaning related to the presence or absence of の, のなら tends to be used in response to a statement on the part of the addressee, or a concrete situation, and conveys the meaning “if you say so,” “if that is true,” or “if that is the actual situation.” On the other hand, when の is not used, なら tends to convey the meaning of “generally, in such cases” or “if/when someone does so.” When (の)なら is combined with a noun or a <i>na</i>-adjective, の is often omitted. When (の)なら is combined with a verb or an <i>i</i>-adjective, it is synonymous with のだったら, and these two are interchangeable. However, の in のだったら cannot be omitted.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>知っているだったら教えてほしい。／If you happen know, I want you to tell me.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>知っている（の）なら教えてほしい。／If you happen to know, I want you to tell me.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type"></span>知っているのだったら教えてほしい。／If you happen to know, I want you to tell me.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x65182"><span class="number">1. </span>...（の）なら〈hypothetical condition〉</h2><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>風邪</rb><rt>か ぜ</rt></ruby>をひいてしまいまして。</span>／<span class="translation">Unfortunately, I’ve caught a cold....</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span><ruby><rb>風邪</rb><rt>か ぜ</rt></ruby>なら<ruby><rb>早</rb><rt>はや</rt></ruby>く<ruby><rb>帰</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>って<ruby><rb>休</rb><rt>やす</rt></ruby>んだほうがいいよ。</span>／<span class="translation">If you’ve got a cold, you should go home early and rest.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>のことがそんなに<ruby><rb>嫌</rb><rt>きら</rt></ruby>いなら<ruby><rb>別</rb><rt>わか</rt></ruby>れたらいい。</span>／<span class="translation">If you dislike her so much, you should break up with her.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>頭</rb><rt>あたま</rt></ruby>がずきずき<ruby><rb>痛</rb><rt>いた</rt></ruby>むんです。</span>／<span class="translation">I have a splitting headache.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>そんなに<ruby><rb>痛</rb><rt>いた</rt></ruby>い（の）なら<ruby><rb>早</rb><rt>はや</rt></ruby>く<ruby><rb>帰</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>ったほうがいいですよ。</span>／<span class="translation">If it hurts that much, you should go home early.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>きたくない（の）ならやめておいたらどうですか。</span>／<span class="translation">If you don’t want to go, why don’t you just say no?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>真相</rb><rt>しん そう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>っている（の）なら<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>教</rb><rt>おし</rt></ruby>えてほしい。</span>／<span class="translation">If you know the truth, I’d like you to tell me.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>郵便局</rb><rt>ゆう びん きょく</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>く（の）なら、この<ruby><rb>手紙</rb><rt>て がみ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>だ</rt></ruby>してきてくれますか。</span>／<span class="translation">If you’re going to the post office, could you mail this letter for me?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（7）</span>あなたがそんなに<ruby><rb>反対</rb><rt>はん たい</rt></ruby>する（の）ならあきらめます。</span>／<span class="translation">If you’re so against it, I’ll give up on it.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（8）</span><span class="number">A:</span>ちょっと<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>物</rb><rt>もの</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ってくる。</span>／<span class="translation">I’m off to do a little shopping.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span><ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>物</rb><rt>もの</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>く（の）ならついでにおしょうゆを<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>ってきてちょうだい。</span>／<span class="translation">If you’re going shopping, please pick up some soy sauce while you’re out.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（9）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>沖縄</rb><rt>おき なわ</rt></ruby>ではもう<ruby><rb>梅雨</rb><rt>つ ゆ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>はい</rt></ruby>ったそうですよ。</span>／<span class="translation">I hear the rainy season in Okinawa has already started.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span><ruby><rb>沖縄</rb><rt>おき なわ</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>梅雨</rb><rt>つ ゆ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>はい</rt></ruby>ったのなら、<ruby><rb>九州</rb><rt>きゅう しゅう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>梅雨入</rb><rt>つ ゆ い</rt></ruby>りも<ruby><rb>間近</rb><rt>ま ぢか</rt></ruby>ですね。</span>／<span class="translation">If the rainy season has started in Okinawa, it’ll start soon in Kyushu, too.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（10）</span><ruby><rb>二人</rb><rt>ふたり</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>昼</rb><rt>ひる</rt></ruby>からこの<ruby><rb>店</rb><rt>みせ</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>会</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>っていたのなら、<ruby><rb>二人</rb><rt>ふたり</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>午前中</rb><rt>ご ぜん ちゅう</rt></ruby>のアリバイはないことになる。</span>／<span class="translation">If the two of them were with each other for (part of) the afternoon in this shop, that means they don’t have an alibi for the morning.</span></div><div class="explanation">When combined with the dictionary form or the <i>ta</i>-form of a predicate, (の)なら expresses a hypothetical condition and means “if that is the actual situation” or “if that is true.” A speaker uses (の)なら to state <span class="noSeparate">his/her</span> own opinion or view, to make a request, or to give advice to the addressee, in light of something the addressee has just said or the situation at hand.</div><div class="explanation">なら cannot be used to refer to things that occur as a matter of course or events that arise naturally with the passage of time. In such cases, expressions like たら, ば, and/or と must be used instead. Also, expressions that merely state a fact cannot be used at the end of a sentence with なら. Expressions indicating a judgment, intention, command, request/demand, suggestion, evaluation, or some other subjective attitude on the part of the speaker must be used.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>春が来るなら花が咲きます。／If spring comes, flowers bloom.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>雨が降るなら道がぬかります。／If rain falls, the road gets muddy.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>春が｛来たら／来れば／来ると｝花が咲きます。／When spring comes, flowers bloom.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>雨が｛降ったら／降ると／降れば｝道がぬかります。／When it rains, the road gets muddy.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>《午後から雨が降ると聞いて》雨が降る（の）なら、傘を持って行こう。（意志）／《having heard that it will rain in the afternoon》If it’s going to rain, I’ll take an umbrella. (intention)</div><div class="explanation">たら, ば and と are used when the condition expressed in the first clause happens prior to the second clause and the situation or event in the second clause is realized as a result. On the other hand, なら can be used even when the situation in the second clause is realized first and the situation in the conditional clause follows.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>イタリアに行ったらイタリア語を習いなさい。（イタリアに行ってからイタリアで習う）／When you go to Italy, study Italian. (= study the language in Italy, after arriving there)</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>イタリアに行くならイタリア語を習いなさい。（イタリアへ行く前に自分の国で習う）／If you’re going to Italy, study Italian. (= study the language in your own country, before going to Italy) </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x65392"><span class="number">2. </span>...（の）なら〈counter-factual〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>電話</rb><rt>でん わ</rt></ruby>をくれるのなら、もう<ruby><rb>少</rb><rt>すこ</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>早</rb><rt>はや</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>電話</rb><rt>でん わ</rt></ruby>してほしかった。</span>／<span class="translation">If you were going to call me, I wish you had called a little earlier.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>神戸</rb><rt>こう べ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>ていたのなら、<ruby><rb>電話</rb><rt>でん わ</rt></ruby>してくれればよかったのに。</span>／<span class="translation">If you were in Kobe, you should have phoned me.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>あいつが<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>るのならこのパーティには<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>なかったんだが。</span>／<span class="translation">If I’d known he was coming, I wouldn’t have come to this party.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>結婚式</rb><rt>けっ こん しき</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>出席</rb><rt>しゅっ せき</rt></ruby>する（の）なら<ruby><rb>黒</rb><rt>くろ</rt></ruby>いスーツを<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>うのだが。</span>／<span class="translation">If I were going to a wedding, I would buy myself a black suit.</span></div><div class="explanation">When (の)なら is used in the pattern X(の)ならY, either Y alone or both X and Y may contradict the given facts. In the first case, (の)なら is used when the speaker learns a new fact, X, and the pattern means “if I had known X (= factual), I could have done Y (= counter-factual), but since I didn’t know X, I didn’t do Y.” In the second case, (の)なら means “if X is done (= counter-factual), Y should be done (= counter-factual), but since X is actually not done, Y is not done either.” (1)-(3) illustrate the first case, and (4) illustrates the second case. For instance, (2), in which X is factual but Y is not, conveys the sense that when the speaker found out that the addressee had come to Kobe, <span class="noSeparate">s/he</span> felt critical or regretful of the fact that the addressee hadn’t called <span class="noSeparate">him/her</span> (you should have called me...). (4), in which both X and Y are counter-factual, means “if I were going to attend a wedding, I would buy a black suit, but since I’m not actually going to a wedding, I’m not going to buy one.”</div><div class="explanation">(の)なら cannot be replaced by たら or ば in (1)-(4), because the meanings of these sentences are not the same as those of counter-factual conditional sentences with たら or ば. In counter-factual conditionals with たら or ば, X and Y are both counter-factual and X must occur prior to Y. On the other hand, in (1)-(3) only Y is counter-factual, and although both X and Y are counter-factual in (4), if X and Y were both realized in these sentences, the sequential relationship between them would be that X occurs after Y: “buy a black suit and then attend a wedding.” Such a relation can only be expressed by なら. Neither たら nor ば can be used instead.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>先週、神戸に来ていたのなら案内してあげたのに。／If you were in Kobe last week, I could have shown you around. (Means “I didn’t know you were in Kobe last week, so I couldn’t show you around.” X (you were in Kobe last week) is factual, while Y (I could have shown you around) is counter-factual.)</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>先週、神戸に来て｛いれば／いたら｝案内してあげたのに。／If you had come to Kobe last week, I would have shown you around. (Means “you didn’t come to Kobe last week, so I couldn’t show you around.” Both X and Y are counter-factual.)</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>結婚式に出るなら黒いスーツを買ったのだけど。／If I were going to a wedding, I would have bought a black suit. (Means “I’m not planning to attend a wedding, so I didn’t buy a black suit.” Both X and Y are counter-factual, and if both were realized, X would follow Y.)</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>黒いスーツを買って｛いれば／いたら｝結婚式に出たのだが。／If I had bought a black suit, I would have attended the wedding. (Means “I hadn’t bought a black suit, so I didn’t attend the wedding.” Both X and Y are counter-factual, and if both were realized, Y would follow X.)</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x65474"><span class="number">3. </span>V-る（の）なら...がいい</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>靴</rb><rt>くつ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>うならイタリア<ruby><rb>製</rb><rt>せい</rt></ruby>がいい。</span>／<span class="translation">If you’re buying shoes, Italian-made ones are the best.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>食事</rb><rt>しょく じ</rt></ruby>をするなら、このレストランがいいよ。</span>／<span class="translation">If you’re going to eat out, I’d recommend this restaurant.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>英語</rb><rt>えい ご</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>習</rb><rt>なら</rt></ruby>うならアメリカかカナダに<ruby><rb>留学</rb><rt>りゅう がく</rt></ruby>することをすすめたい。</span>／<span class="translation">If you want to learn English, I’d suggest studying in the United States or Canada.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>大学</rb><rt>だい がく</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>卒業</rb><rt>そつ ぎょう</rt></ruby>したら<ruby><rb>留学</rb><rt>りゅう がく</rt></ruby>したいと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>っているんだ。</span>／<span class="translation">I’m thinking of going abroad to study after I graduate from college.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span><ruby><rb>留学</rb><rt>りゅう がく</rt></ruby>するのならオーストラリアがいいよ。</span>／<span class="translation">If you’re going to study abroad, I’d recommend Australia.</span></div><div class="explanation">When (の)なら is followed by expressions such as がいい and をすすめる, its function is to recommend the best way or method of doing something. This pattern is often used in advertising slogans and/or commercials.</div><div class="explanation">When talking about an action in general, rather than a particular person’s action, の is usually omitted. The meaning of V-るなら...がいい is similar to the meaning of expressions in which なら and は are used as topic markers, such as Nなら...がいい and Nは...がいい.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>靴を買うならイタリア製がいい。／If you’re buying shoes, Italian-made ones are the best.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>靴ならイタリア製がいい。／When it comes to shoes, Italian-made ones are the best.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>靴はイタリア製がいい。／As for shoes, Italian-made ones are the best.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x65560"><span class="number">4. </span>V-る（の）なら　...しろ／...するな</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>何事</rb><rt>なに ごと</rt></ruby>もやるなら<ruby><rb>最後</rb><rt>さい ご</rt></ruby>まで<ruby><rb>徹底的</rb><rt>てっ てい てき</rt></ruby>にやれ。</span>／<span class="translation">Whatever you do, follow it through to the very end.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>女性</rb><rt>じょ せい</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>付</rb><rt>つ</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>合</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>うなら<ruby><rb>真剣</rb><rt>しん けん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>付</rb><rt>つ</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>合</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>いなさい。</span>／<span class="translation">If you’re going out with a girl, be serious about it.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>留学</rb><rt>りゅう がく</rt></ruby>するならいい<ruby><rb>加減</rb><rt>か げん</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>気持</rb><rt>き も</rt></ruby>ちではするな。</span>／<span class="translation">If you’re going to study abroad, don’t do it halfway.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>のことを<ruby><rb>笑</rb><rt>わら</rt></ruby>うなら<ruby><rb>勝手</rb><rt>かっ て</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>笑</rb><rt>わら</rt></ruby>えばいい。</span>／<span class="translation">If you want to laugh at me, feel free to do so.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>泣</rb><rt>な</rt></ruby>きたいのなら<ruby><rb>好</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>きなだけ<ruby><rb>泣</rb><rt>な</rt></ruby>けばいい。</span>／<span class="translation">If you feel like crying, go ahead and cry your heart out. </span></div><div class="explanation">When (の)なら is preceded and followed by the same verb, its function is to give instructions about how something should be done. (の)なら may be followed by expressions of command or prohibition, as well as expressions of suggestion or recommendation such as すればいい. (4) and (5) convey the meaning “if you want to do so, go ahead and do as you please.” </div><div class="explanation">When this pattern is used to mean “when something is done in general,” なら is usually not preceded by の. However, when it is used in response to an utterance or intention of a particular person, with the meaning “if you have such an intention” or “if you want to do so,” it may take the form のなら, as shown in (5).</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x65613"><span class="number">5. </span>...（の）なら...で</h2><h4 class="info">［Na ならNa で］</h4><h4 class="info">［A（の）ならAで］</h4><h4 class="info">［V（の）ならVで］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>嫌</rb><rt>いや</rt></ruby>なら<ruby><rb>嫌</rb><rt>いや</rt></ruby>で、そう<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ってくれたらよかったのに。<ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>となっては<ruby><rb>遅</rb><rt>おそ</rt></ruby>すぎるよ。</span>／<span class="translation">If you didn’t like it, you should have told me so. It’s too late now. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>金</rb><rt>かね</rt></ruby>がないならないで、<ruby><rb>人生</rb><rt>じん せい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>とかなるものさ。</span>／<span class="translation">So what if there’s no money—life will still turn out all right.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>会社</rb><rt>かい しゃ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>辞</rb><rt>や</rt></ruby>める（の）なら<ruby><rb>辞</rb><rt>や</rt></ruby>めるで、それからあとの<ruby><rb>身</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>振</rb><rt>ふ</rt></ruby>り<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>かた</rt></ruby>ぐらい<ruby><rb>考</rb><rt>かんが</rt></ruby>えておくべきだった。</span>／<span class="translation">Before I up and left the company, I should have at least considered what I would do next.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>遅</rb><rt>おそ</rt></ruby>くなる（の）なら<ruby><rb>遅</rb><rt>おそ</rt></ruby>くなるで、ちゃんと<ruby><rb>連絡</rb><rt>れん らく</rt></ruby>ぐらいしてくれればいいのに。</span>／<span class="translation">If you knew you’d be late, you could have at least let me know.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>かない（の）なら<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>かないで、ちゃんと<ruby><rb>断</rb><rt>こと</rt></ruby>わりの<ruby><rb>連絡</rb><rt>れん らく</rt></ruby>だけはしておいたほうがいい。</span>／<span class="translation">If you’re not going, that’s fine, but you should at least make sure to send your regrets. </span></div><div class="explanation">When the same word is repeated before and after (の)なら, the speaker is acknowledging a certain situation to be as it is. <span class="noSeparate">S/he</span> then states what kind of action should be taken under such circumstances, or expresses criticism or regret that such an action has not been taken.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x65662"><span class="number">6. </span>...（の）なら...と</h2><h4 class="info">［NならN（だ）と］</h4><h4 class="info">［Na ならNa（だ）と］</h4><h4 class="info">［A（の）ならAと］</h4><h4 class="info">［V（の）ならVと］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>欠席</rb><rt>けっ せき</rt></ruby>なら<ruby><rb>欠席</rb><rt>けっ せき</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>前</rb><rt>まえ</rt></ruby>もって<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>らせておいてください。</span>／<span class="translation">If you’re going to be absent, please let me know in advance.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>そうならそうと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ってほしかった。</span>／<span class="translation">I just wanted you to tell me the truth.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>嫌</rb><rt>いや</rt></ruby>なら<ruby><rb>嫌</rb><rt>いや</rt></ruby>だとはっきり<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ってくれればいいのに。</span>／<span class="translation">If you don’t like it, you should come straight out and tell me so. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>好</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>きなら<ruby><rb>好</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>きとはっきり<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>っておけばよかった。</span>／<span class="translation">If I knew I liked him, I should have told him directly. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>都合</rb><rt>つ ごう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>悪</rb><rt>わる</rt></ruby>い（の）なら<ruby><rb>悪</rb><rt>わる</rt></ruby>いと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ってくれればよかったのに。</span>／<span class="translation">If it wasn’t convenient for you, you should have said so. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span>これからは<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>ない（の）なら<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>ないとちゃんと<ruby><rb>事前</rb><rt>じ ぜん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>連絡</rb><rt>れん らく</rt></ruby>して<ruby><rb>下</rb><rt>くだ</rt></ruby>さいね。</span>／<span class="translation">From now on, please be sure to contact me in advance when you’re not coming.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（7）</span><ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>く（の）なら<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>く、<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>かない（の）なら<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>かないとちゃんと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ってくれなければ<ruby><rb>困</rb><rt>こま</rt></ruby>るじゃないですか。</span>／<span class="translation">Can’t you see what trouble you cause for me if you don’t tell me whether or not you’re coming?</span></div><div class="explanation">The same word is repeated before and after (の)なら, and ...とis followed by expressions of utterance such as 言う and 連絡する. This pattern expresses the speaker’s attitude that the listener or a third person should clearly indicate <span class="noSeparate">his/her</span> intentions regarding <span class="noSeparate">his/her</span> own actions.</div><div class="explanation">This pattern is usually used to criticize someone else for not expressing <span class="noSeparate">his/her</span> intentions clearly, or to advise <span class="noSeparate">him/her</span> that <span class="noSeparate">s/he</span> should have indicated them clearly. However, it can also be used by the speaker to express <span class="noSeparate">his/her</span> regret that <span class="noSeparate">s/he</span> didn’t make <span class="noSeparate">his/her</span> own intentions clear, as shown in (4).</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x65735"><span class="number">7. </span>...（の）ならべつだが</h2><h4 class="info">［N／Na　ならべつだが］</h4><h4 class="info">［A／V　（の）ならべつだが］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>そんなに<ruby><rb>勉強</rb><rt>べん きょう</rt></ruby>がつまらない（の）なら<ruby><rb>別</rb><rt>べつ</rt></ruby>だが、<ruby><rb>自分</rb><rt>じ ぶん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>心構</rb><rt>こころ がま</rt></ruby>えについても<ruby><rb>反省</rb><rt>はん せい</rt></ruby>してみてはどうだろうか。</span>／<span class="translation">It would be a different matter if your studies were really that boring, but how about reflecting on your own attitude for a change?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>やめたい（の）なら<ruby><rb>別</rb><rt>べつ</rt></ruby>だが、もし<ruby><rb>続</rb><rt>つづ</rt></ruby>けたい（の）ならもう<ruby><rb>少</rb><rt>すこ</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>基礎的</rb><rt>き そ てき</rt></ruby>なところから<ruby><rb>勉強</rb><rt>べん きょう</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>直</rb><rt>なお</rt></ruby>した<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>ほう</rt></ruby>がいい。</span>／<span class="translation">If you want to quit, that’s fine, but if you intend to continue, you ought to go back to the basics and start studying all over again.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>本気</rb><rt>ほん き</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>頑張</rb><rt>がん ば</rt></ruby>る<ruby><rb>気</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>があるのなら<ruby><rb>別</rb><rt>べつ</rt></ruby>だがいい<ruby><rb>加減</rb><rt>か げん</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>気持</rb><rt>き も</rt></ruby>ちでやっているならやめたほうがいい。</span>／<span class="translation">It’s all right if you’re serious about doing this, but if you’re just fooling around, then you’d better quit.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>自分</rb><rt>じ ぶん</rt></ruby>のことなら<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はなし</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>別</rb><rt>べつ</rt></ruby>だが、<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>のことにそんなに<ruby><rb>気</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>揉</rb><rt>も</rt></ruby>んでも<ruby><rb>仕方</rb><rt>し かた</rt></ruby>がないだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">If it were your own problem, it’d be a different matter, but there’s no use worrying so much about other people.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>どうしても<ruby><rb>嫌</rb><rt>いや</rt></ruby>なら<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はなし</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>別</rb><rt>べつ</rt></ruby>だが、<ruby><rb>我慢</rb><rt>が まん</rt></ruby>して<ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>会社</rb><rt>かい しゃ</rt></ruby>にとどまるのも<ruby><rb>一</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>つの<ruby><rb>考</rb><rt>かんが</rt></ruby>えだ。</span>／<span class="translation">If you really can’t stand it, that’d be different, but one idea to consider is hanging in there and staying with the company.</span></div><div class="explanation">(の)ならべつだが assumes two distinct situations. It is used to introduce one situation as being inapplicable and to state the speaker’s opinion concerning the other possible situation. It is often followed by expressions intended to influence the listener, such as criticism, warning, or advice. As shown in (4) and (5), (の)ならべつだが may also take the form ...なら話は別だが．</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x65782"><span class="number">8. </span>...というのなら</h2><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>明日</rb><rt>あ す</rt></ruby>はほかに<ruby><rb>用事</rb><rt>よう じ</rt></ruby>があってお<ruby><rb>邪魔</rb><rt>じゃ ま</rt></ruby>できないのですが。</span>／<span class="translation">I have something else to do tomorrow, so I can’t come to visit you.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span><ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>たくないと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>うのなら<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>てもらわなくてもいい。</span>／<span class="translation">If you’re saying you don’t want to come, that’s fine with me.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>責任</rb><rt>せき にん</rt></ruby>をもつと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>うのなら、<ruby><rb>信頼</rb><rt>しん らい</rt></ruby>して<ruby><rb>任</rb><rt>まか</rt></ruby>せてみてはどうですか。</span>／<span class="translation">If she says she’ll take responsibility, why don’t you trust her and let her handle it?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>大事</rb><rt>だい じ</rt></ruby>だと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>うのなら、もっと<ruby><rb>家庭</rb><rt>か てい</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>大切</rb><rt>たい せつ</rt></ruby>にしなくてはだめだ。</span>／<span class="translation">If you say your child is important, then you have to take better care of your family.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>経営</rb><rt>けい えい</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>詰</rb><rt>づ</rt></ruby>まっているというのならあんな<ruby><rb>派手</rb><rt>は で</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>商売</rb><rt>しょう ばい</rt></ruby>はできないはずだ。</span>／<span class="translation">If it’s true that their business is at a standstill, then they shouldn’t be able to put on such a flashy sales campaign.</span></div><div class="explanation">というのなら is used to indicate a judgment on the part of the speaker regarding the content of the preceding conversation. It is followed by an expression of permission, advice, or suggestion directed toward the listener, or an inference made by the speaker. ということなら can also be used.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x65831"><span class="number">9. </span>...ということなら</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>癌</rb><rt>がん</rt></ruby>だということなら<ruby><rb>退院</rb><rt>たい いん</rt></ruby>させてくれるはずがない。</span>／<span class="translation">If it really is cancer, there’s no way that they’ll release you from the hospital.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>自分</rb><rt>じ ぶん</rt></ruby>たちでやるということなら、やらせてみてはどうか。</span>／<span class="translation">If they say they’ll do it by themselves, how about letting them go ahead and do it?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>期限内</rb><rt>き げん ない</rt></ruby>にできないということなら、ほかの<ruby><rb>業者</rb><rt>ぎょう しゃ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>頼</rb><rt>たの</rt></ruby>むことにしよう。</span>／<span class="translation">If he says they can’t finish it by the deadline, then we’ll ask another dealer.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses the speaker’s response to something a third party has said. Used in more or less the same way as というのなら. However, というのなら can be used to respond to something said by either a direct addressee or a third person who is not present, in which cases it means “if you say so” or “if <span class="noSeparate">s/he</span> says so,” respectively. ということなら usually means the latter only.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x65862"><span class="number">10. </span>どうせ...（の）なら<span class="reference">→<a href="part0546.xhtml#idsubtitlex1x51277">【どうせ】2</a></span></h2><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x65870"><span class="number">11. </span>...ものなら<span class="reference">→<a href="part1007.xhtml#idsubtitlex1x99680">【ものなら】1</a></span></h2><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x65878"><span class="number">12. </span>V-ようものなら<span class="reference">→<a href="part1007.xhtml#idsubtitlex1x99741">【ものなら】2</a></span></h2></body></html>