<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>よほど</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part1039.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【よそに】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part1041.xhtml">【よもや】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x104543">【よほど】</h1><div class="explanation">In speech, this becomes よっぽど for emphasis.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x104555"><span class="number">1. </span>よほど</h2><h3 class="subsubtitle" id="idsubsubtitlex1x104558"><span class="number">a. </span>よほど</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>こんな<ruby><rb>大邸宅</rb><rt>だい てい たく</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>建</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>てるなんて、よほどの<ruby><rb>金持</rb><rt>かね も</rt></ruby>ちに<ruby><rb>違</rb><rt>ちが</rt></ruby>いない。</span>／<span class="translation">She must be wealthy to be building such a mansion like this.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>よっぽどのことがなければ、<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>はここには<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>ません。</span>／<span class="translation">Unless he was forced by something really important, he won’t come here.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>あいつはよほど<ruby><rb>金</rb><rt>かね</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>困</rb><rt>こま</rt></ruby>っているらしい。<ruby><rb>昨日</rb><rt>きのう</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>友達</rb><rt>とも だち</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>昼</rb><rt>ひる</rt></ruby>ごはんをおごってもらっていた。</span>／<span class="translation">That guy seems to be having real money troubles. His friend treated him to lunch again yesterday.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>よっぽど<ruby><rb>疲</rb><rt>つか</rt></ruby>れていたんだろう。<ruby><rb>弟</rb><rt>おとうと</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>帰</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>ってくるとご<ruby><rb>飯</rb><rt>はん</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べずに<ruby><rb>寝</rb><rt>ね</rt></ruby>てしまった。</span>／<span class="translation">He must have been really tired. As soon as my younger brother came home he went straight to bed without eating dinner.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>その<ruby><rb>映画</rb><rt>えい が</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>続</rb><rt>つづ</rt></ruby>けて3<ruby><rb>回</rb><rt>かい</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>観</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>たって？　よっぽどよかったんだね。</span>／<span class="translation">You’ve seen that movie three times? It must be really good.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>泣</rb><rt>な</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>ごと</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>わない<ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>愚痴</rb><rt>ぐ ち</rt></ruby>をこぼすとは、よほど<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>がつらかったんだろうと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>う。</span>／<span class="translation">She never complains and so, if she grumbles, the job must have been really hard.</span></div><div class="explanation">Shows a condition that, judging from the general standard, is not average. Used to make a conjecture about the extent of something.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x104607"><span class="number">b. </span>...ほうがよほど</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>真夏</rb><rt>ま なつ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>日本</rb><rt>に ほん</rt></ruby>よりインドネシアの<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>ほう</rt></ruby>がよっぽど<ruby><rb>涼</rb><rt>すず</rt></ruby>しかった。</span>／<span class="translation">Indonesia was much cooler than Japan in midsummer.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>こんなに<ruby><rb>狭</rb><rt>せま</rt></ruby>くて<ruby><rb>家賃</rb><rt>や ちん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>高</rb><rt>たか</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>部屋</rb><rt>へ や</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>住</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>むくらいなら、<ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>古</rb><rt>ふる</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>部屋</rb><rt>へ や</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>ほう</rt></ruby>がよっぽどましだ。</span>／<span class="translation">I’d much rather live in my old apartment than pay high rent to live in an apartment this small.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>姉</rb><rt>あね</rt></ruby>より<ruby><rb>弟</rb><rt>おとうと</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>ほう</rt></ruby>がよっぽどよく<ruby><rb>家事</rb><rt>か じ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>手伝</rb><rt>て つだ</rt></ruby>ってくれる。</span>／<span class="translation">My younger brother is much better at helping with the housework than my older sister.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>入学</rb><rt>にゅう がく</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>試験</rb><rt>し けん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>受</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>ける<ruby><rb>兄</rb><rt>あに</rt></ruby>より<ruby><rb>母</rb><rt>はは</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>ほう</rt></ruby>がよっぽど<ruby><rb>神経質</rb><rt>しん けい しつ</rt></ruby>になっている。</span>／<span class="translation">My mother is much more nervous than my older brother who is taking the university entrance exams.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>こんなにつらいのなら<ruby><rb>死</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>んだほうがよほどましだ。</span>／<span class="translation">If it’s this painful, I would rather die.</span></div><div class="explanation">Followed by adjectives and verbs. In the form (Xより)Yのほうがよほど this compares two things and demonstrates that Y is by far (something) to a greater extent. Often used in cases where Y is preferred. Means “far and away.”</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x104650"><span class="number">2. </span>よほどV-よう</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>こんなつまらない<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>、よほど<ruby><rb>辞</rb><rt>や</rt></ruby>めようかと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>った。</span>／<span class="translation">I thought I would quit such a boring job.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>あいつに<ruby><rb>失礼</rb><rt>しつ れい</rt></ruby>なことを<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>われて<ruby><rb>腹</rb><rt>はら</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>立</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>ったので、よほど<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>返</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>してやろうかと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>ったが、<ruby><rb>大人</rb><rt>おとな</rt></ruby>げないので<ruby><rb>黙</rb><rt>だま</rt></ruby>っていた。</span>／<span class="translation">Because I got angry when that guy said something rude to me, I thought about answering back but, because that’s immature, I kept my mouth shut.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>皿</rb><rt>さら</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>洗</rb><rt>あら</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>かた</rt></ruby>があまりにも<ruby><rb>不器用</rb><rt>ぶ き よう</rt></ruby>なので、よっぽど<ruby><rb>自分</rb><rt>じ ぶん</rt></ruby>でやってしまおうと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>ったが、<ruby><rb>我慢</rb><rt>が まん</rt></ruby>して<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>ていた。</span>／<span class="translation">Because his way of washing dishes is so ineffective, I thought that I should just do them myself but I forced myself to just watch.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>その<ruby><rb>講演</rb><rt>こう えん</rt></ruby>はあんまりつまらなかったので、よっぽど<ruby><rb>途中</rb><rt>と ちゅう</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>帰</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>ろうと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>ったが、<ruby><rb>誰</rb><rt>だれ</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>席</rb><rt>せき</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>立</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>たないのでしかたなく<ruby><rb>最後</rb><rt>さい ご</rt></ruby>まで<ruby><rb>聞</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>いていた。</span>／<span class="translation">Because that lecture was so boring I thought about leaving in the middle of it but, as nobody left their seats, I had no choice but to stay to the end.</span></div><div class="explanation">Often used together with と思った and means “to strongly think one will....” Used in cases where something is only thought and cannot be done and a contradictory clause often comes after.</div></body></html>