<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>からといって</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0163.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【からでなければ】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0165.xhtml">【からには】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x13454">【からといって】</h1><h4 class="info">［N／Na　だからといって］</h4><h4 class="info">［A／V　からといって］</h4><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x13460"><span class="number">1. </span>...からといって</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>用事</rb><rt>よう じ</rt></ruby>があるからと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>って、<ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>途中</rb><rt>と ちゅう</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>帰</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>った。</span>／<span class="translation">She said she had something to do and went home before it was over.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>電車</rb><rt>でん しゃ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>中</rb><rt>なか</rt></ruby>でおなかがすくといけないからと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>って、<ruby><rb>見送</rb><rt>み おく</rt></ruby>りに<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>た<ruby><rb>母</rb><rt>はは</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>売店</rb><rt>ばい てん</rt></ruby>であれこれ<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>っている。</span>／<span class="translation">My mother, who had come to see me off, bought me one thing after another at the stall, saying it would never do to go hungry on the train.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to quote a reason that another person has given.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x13485"><span class="number">2. </span>...からといって+<ruby><rb>否</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>定</rb><rt>てい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>的</rb><rt>てき</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>表</rb><rt>ひょう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>現</rb><rt>げん</rt></ruby></h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>手紙</rb><rt>て がみ</rt></ruby>がしばらく<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>ないからといって、<ruby><rb>病気</rb><rt>びょう き</rt></ruby>だとはかぎらないよ。</span>／<span class="translation">Even though we haven’t had a letter for a while, it doesn’t necessarily mean he is sick.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>いくらおふくろだからといって、ぼくの<ruby><rb>日記</rb><rt>にっ き</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>読</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>むなんてゆるせない。</span>／<span class="translation">I can’t forgive her for reading my diary, even if she is my mother.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses “for this reason alone.” Followed by a negative expression and means that “X, thus Y” doesn’t always apply.</div></body></html>