<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>をちゅうしんに</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part1074.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【をたよりに】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part1076.xhtml">【をつうじて】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x107915">【をちゅうしんに】</h1><h4 class="info">［NをちゅうしんにV］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>そのグループは<ruby><rb>山田</rb><rt>やま だ</rt></ruby>さんを<ruby><rb>中心</rb><rt>ちゅう しん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>作業</rb><rt>さ ぎょう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>進</rb><rt>すす</rt></ruby>めている。</span>／<span class="translation">With Yamada-san at the center, that group is advancing their operations.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>そのチームはキャプテンを<ruby><rb>中心</rb><rt>ちゅう しん</rt></ruby>によくまとまったいいチームだ。</span>／<span class="translation">With the captain at its center, that is a well-organized, good team.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>太陽系</rb><rt>たい よう けい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>惑星</rb><rt>わく せい</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>太陽</rb><rt>たい よう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>中心</rb><rt>ちゅう しん</rt></ruby>としてまわっている。</span>／<span class="translation">The solar system’s planets revolve around the sun.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>台風</rb><rt>たい ふう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>影響</rb><rt>えい きょう</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>九州地方</rb><rt>きゅう しゅう ち ほう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>中心</rb><rt>ちゅう しん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>西日本</rb><rt>にし に ほん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>全体</rb><rt>ぜん たい</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>広</rb><rt>ひろ</rt></ruby>がる<ruby><rb>見込</rb><rt>み こ</rt></ruby>みです。</span>／<span class="translation">The effects of the typhoon are expected to spread over the whole of western Japan, centering on the Kyushu region.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>このバスは、<ruby><rb>朝</rb><rt>あさ</rt></ruby>7<ruby><rb>時台</rb><rt>じ だい</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>夕方</rb><rt>ゆう がた</rt></ruby>6<ruby><rb>時台</rb><rt>じ だい</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>中心</rb><rt>ちゅう しん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>多</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>くの<ruby><rb>便数</rb><rt>びん すう</rt></ruby>がある。</span>／<span class="translation">This bus route has many services, particularly between seven and eight in the morning and six and seven in the evening.</span></div><div class="explanation">This means “with... at the center.” This is used to show the extent of an action, phenomenon, or situation which is placed at the center/is at the core of something. It is also used in the forms ...をちゅうしんにして and ...をちゅうしんとして. Has the tone of written language.</div></body></html>