<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>がな</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0136.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【かな】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0138.xhtml">【かなにか】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x11819">【がな】</h1><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>山田</rb><rt>やま だ</rt></ruby>さんはまだ<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>ないの？　<ruby><rb>遅</rb><rt>おく</rt></ruby>れずに<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>るように<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>っておいたんだがな。</span>／<span class="translation">Yamada-san hasn’t come yet? I told her not to be late!</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>今度</rb><rt>こん ど</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>試験</rb><rt>し けん</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>駄目</rb><rt>だ め</rt></ruby>だった。<ruby><rb>一生懸命</rb><rt>いっ しょう けん めい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>勉強</rb><rt>べん きょう</rt></ruby>したつもりなんだがなあ。</span>／<span class="translation">I did badly on this test, too...and I was sure I had studied so hard for it.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>あした<ruby><rb>運動会</rb><rt>うん どう かい</rt></ruby>だろう？　<ruby><rb>雨</rb><rt>あめ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>降</rb><rt>ふ</rt></ruby>らないといいがなあ。</span>／<span class="translation">Tomorrow is the sports day, right? I sure hope it doesn’t rain.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>らももう<ruby><rb>少</rb><rt>すこ</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>本気</rb><rt>ほん き</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>取</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>り<ruby><rb>組</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>んでくれるようになるといいんだがなあ。</span>／<span class="translation">I wish they would get a little more serious about their work.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>田口</rb><rt>た ぐち</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>君</rb><rt>くん</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>暇</rb><rt>ひま</rt></ruby>？　ちょっと<ruby><rb>手伝</rb><rt>て つだ</rt></ruby>ってくれるとありがたいんだがな。</span>／<span class="translation">Taguchi-kun, are you free right now? It’d be great if you could give me a hand for a second.</span></div><div class="explanation">Consists of the contradictory conjunction が combined with the particle な. Used at the end of a sentence and indicates either bewilderment at the gap between one’s intention and the actual outcome, or a wish for something that has yet to occur. As in example (5), it can be used to make a request. It cannot be attached to a sentence in polite form. It is a spoken language expression used by men when they are talking to themselves or to someone close. The final sound な is sometimes lengthened so it is pronounced as ...がなあ. A similar expression, ...けどな, is used by women.</div></body></html>