<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>しかも</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0264.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【しかたがない】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0266.xhtml">【しだい】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x20847">【しかも】</h1><h4 class="info">［N／Na　でしかも］</h4><h4 class="info">［A-くてしかも］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>いいアパートを<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>つけた。<ruby><rb>部屋</rb><rt>へ や</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>広</rb><rt>ひろ</rt></ruby>くて、<ruby><rb>南向</rb><rt>みなみ む</rt></ruby>きでしかも<ruby><rb>駅</rb><rt>えき</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>歩</rb><rt>ある</rt></ruby>いて5<ruby><rb>分</rb><rt>ふん</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">I found a good apartment. The rooms are spacious, it faces south, and what’s more it’s only a five-minute walk from the station.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>通訳</rb><rt>つう やく</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>採用枠</rb><rt>さいようわく</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>二名</rb><rt>に めい</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>対</rb><rt>たい</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>百人</rb><rt>ひゃくにん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>近</rb><rt>ちか</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>応募</rb><rt>おう ぼ</rt></ruby>があったが、その<ruby><rb>九割</rb><rt>きゅう わり</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>女性</rb><rt>じょ せい</rt></ruby>で、しかも<ruby><rb>半数</rb><rt>はんすう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>以上</rb><rt>い じょう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>留学</rb><rt>りゅう がく</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>経験者</rb><rt>けいけんしゃ</rt></ruby>だった。</span>／<span class="translation">There were nearly a hundred applicants for the two openings for interpreters, of whom ninety percent were female, and more than the half of them had studied abroad. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>若</rb><rt>わか</rt></ruby>くて、きれいで、しかも<ruby><rb>性格</rb><rt>せい かく</rt></ruby>がいいとなれば<ruby><rb>結婚</rb><rt>けっ こん</rt></ruby>したがる<ruby><rb>男</rb><rt>おとこ</rt></ruby>はいくらでもいるだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">I would think that there are any number of men who would like to marry someone who is young and pretty and has a good personality to boot.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>速</rb><rt>はや</rt></ruby>くて、しかも<ruby><rb>間違</rb><rt>ま ちが</rt></ruby>いが<ruby><rb>少</rb><rt>すく</rt></ruby>ないので<ruby><rb>上司</rb><rt>じょう し</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>信頼</rb><rt>しん らい</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>厚</rb><rt>あつ</rt></ruby>い。</span>／<span class="translation">She’s a fast worker and also makes few mistakes, so her boss places a lot of trust in her.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>会社</rb><rt>かい しゃ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>近</rb><rt>ちか</rt></ruby>くで<ruby><rb>安</rb><rt>やす</rt></ruby>くておいしい<ruby><rb>店</rb><rt>みせ</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>ってるんだって。</span>／<span class="translation">I hear you know a restaurant close to the office that's cheap and delicious. </span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>うん、しかもすいてるんだよ。</span>／<span class="translation">Yeah, and what's more, it isn’t crowded.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span>この<ruby><rb>不況</rb><rt>ふ きょう</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>会社</rb><rt>かい しゃ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>昇給</rb><rt>しょう きゅう</rt></ruby>なし、しかもボーナスは<ruby><rb>例年</rb><rt>れい ねん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>半分</rb><rt>はん ぶん</rt></ruby>になった。</span>／<span class="translation">Because of the recession, there have been no salary increases at the company, and on top of that, the bonus is half as much as in past years.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used when describing something, to add another condition with a similar tendency. Means “on top of that, in addition.”</div></body></html>