<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>がち</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0124.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【かたわら】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0126.xhtml">【かつ】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x11323">【がち】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x11325"><span class="number">1. </span>Nがち</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>その<ruby><rb>作家</rb><rt>さっ か</rt></ruby>は、ここ<ruby><rb>数</rb><rt>すう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>年</rb><rt>ねん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>病気</rb><rt>びょう き</rt></ruby>がちでなかなかまとまった<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>ができないと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>っている。</span>／<span class="translation">The writer says she has been sickly in recent years and has found it hard to complete any work.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>このところ、はっきりしない<ruby><rb>曇</rb><rt>くも</rt></ruby>りがちの<ruby><rb>天気</rb><rt>てん き</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>続</rb><rt>つづ</rt></ruby>いているので、<ruby><rb>洗濯</rb><rt>せん たく</rt></ruby>ものが<ruby><rb>干</rb><rt>ほ</rt></ruby>せなくて<ruby><rb>困</rb><rt>こま</rt></ruby>る。</span>／<span class="translation">Because we’ve been having such unsettled, mostly cloudy weather these days, it’s a real problem not to be able to hang the wash out to dry.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>どうしてあんなことをしたんだと<ruby><rb>問</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>いつめると、<ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>伏</rb><rt>ふ</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>目</rb><rt>め</rt></ruby>がちに、どうしてもお<ruby><rb>金</rb><rt>かね</rt></ruby>がほしかったのだと<ruby><rb>答</rb><rt>こた</rt></ruby>えた。</span>／<span class="translation">When I demanded to know why she had done such a thing, she answered, with downcast eyes, that she had been desperate for money.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>「よかったらうちまで<ruby><rb>車</rb><rt>くるま</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>送</rb><rt>おく</rt></ruby>ってもらえないでしょうか」と、<ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>遠慮</rb><rt>えん りょ</rt></ruby>がちにたずねた。</span>／<span class="translation">“Could you possibly take me home in your car?” she hesitantly asked me.</span></div><div class="explanation">Attaches to a noun and expresses that something has the characteristics of that noun or tends to be in the state it implies. Used when the state implied by the noun is considered unusual or has a negative connotation. Thus the words with which がち can be combined are limited. Examples (3) and (4) are idiomatic expressions.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x11362"><span class="number">2. </span>R-がち</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>寒</rb><rt>さむ</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>季節</rb><rt>き せつ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>家</rb><rt>いえ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>中</rb><rt>なか</rt></ruby>にこもりがちだが、たまには<ruby><rb>外</rb><rt>そと</rt></ruby>にでて<ruby><rb>体</rb><rt>からだ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>動</rb><rt>うご</rt></ruby>かした<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>ほう</rt></ruby>がいい。</span>／<span class="translation">We tend to stay inside in the cold season, but it’s better to go outside once in a while and get some exercise.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>電話</rb><rt>でん わ</rt></ruby>すると、どうしても<ruby><rb>長話</rb><rt>なが ばなし</rt></ruby>になりがちで、いつも<ruby><rb>父親</rb><rt>ちち おや</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>文句</rb><rt>もん く</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>われる。</span>／<span class="translation">When I phone her, it tends to be a long call and my father complains to me about it.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>甘</rb><rt>あま</rt></ruby>いものはついつい<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べ<ruby><rb>過</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>ぎてしまいがちなので、ダイエット<ruby><rb>中</rb><rt>ちゅう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>気</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>をつけましょう。</span>／<span class="translation">It’s so easy to end up eating too many sweets, so we have to be careful when we’re on a diet.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>惰性</rb><rt>だ せい</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>続</rb><rt>つづ</rt></ruby>けていると、この<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>飛</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>び<ruby><rb>込</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>んだ<ruby><rb>頃</rb><rt>ころ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>若々</rb><rt>わか わか</rt></ruby>しい<ruby><rb>情熱</rb><rt>じょう ねつ</rt></ruby>をつい<ruby><rb>忘</rb><rt>わす</rt></ruby>れがちになる。</span>／<span class="translation">When we keep on working from sheer force of habit, we tend to forget the youthful zest we once had when we started the job.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>「『<ruby><rb>役不足</rb><rt>やく ぶ そく</rt></ruby>』とは『その<ruby><rb>役</rb><rt>やく</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>務</rb><rt>つと</rt></ruby>めるには<ruby><rb>能力</rb><rt>のう りょく</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>不足</rb><rt>ふ そく</rt></ruby>している』という<ruby><rb>意味</rb><rt>い み</rt></ruby>だ」という<ruby><rb>解釈</rb><rt>かい しゃく</rt></ruby>は、ありがちな<ruby><rb>間違</rb><rt>ま ちが</rt></ruby>いだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Interpreting the expression <i>yakubusoku</i> as “lacking the ability to fulfil that role” is a common error.</span></div><div class="explanation">Attaches to a verb and means that one tends to do something even when one doesn’t mean to. Describes an unfavorable action. Often used withどうしても (can’t help but do something), つい (involuntarily, unwittingly), うっかり(carelessly, without realizing), and てしまう (end up doing something). ありがちな in (5) means “something that happens frequently.”</div></body></html>