<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>べく</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0918.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【べき】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0920.xhtml">【べし】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x85176">【べく】</h1><h4 class="info">［V-るべく］</h4><div class="explanation">The verb stem of an auxiliary verb べし that is used in classical written language. It is used in modern Japanese as an expression that is formal and is in the style of written language.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x85190"><span class="number">1. </span>...べくV-た</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>大学</rb><rt>だい がく</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>進</rb><rt>すす</rt></ruby>むべく<ruby><rb>上京</rb><rt>じょう きょう</rt></ruby>した。</span>／<span class="translation">They went to Tokyo in order to go to university.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>速</rb><rt>すみ</rt></ruby>やかに<ruby><rb>解決</rb><rt>かい けつ</rt></ruby>すべく<ruby><rb>努力</rb><rt>ど りょく</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>致</rb><rt>いた</rt></ruby>します。</span>／<span class="translation">We will do our best to resolve the issue promptly.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>しかるべく<ruby><rb>処置</rb><rt>しょ ち</rt></ruby>されたい。</span>／<span class="translation">Please deal with the matter appropriately.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “in order to do ...” or “so that ... can be done.” (3) is asking for an appropriate action to be taken. Used in formal expressions in the style of written language.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x85221"><span class="number">2. </span>V...べくしてV-た</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>この<ruby><rb>機械</rb><rt>き かい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>危険性</rb><rt>き けん せい</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>以前</rb><rt>い ぜん</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>何度</rb><rt>なん ど</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>指摘</rb><rt>し てき</rt></ruby>されていた。この<ruby><rb>事故</rb><rt>じ こ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>起</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>こるべくして<ruby><rb>起</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>こったといえる。</span>／<span class="translation">The danger of this machinery has been pointed out on numerous occasions. It could be said that this accident was waiting to happen.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>勝</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>ったのは<ruby><rb>偶然</rb><rt>ぐう ぜん</rt></ruby>ではない。<ruby><rb>練習</rb><rt>れん しゅう</rt></ruby>につぐ<ruby><rb>練習</rb><rt>れん しゅう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>重</rb><rt>かさ</rt></ruby>ねて、<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>勝</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>つべくして<ruby><rb>勝</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>ったのだ。</span>／<span class="translation">His victory was not coincidental. Practice after practice brought about his well-deserved victory.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means something has happened as it has been anticipated as a matter of course when the verb is repeated.</div><div class="explanation">(1) means that people had been worried that an accident might take place and indeed, an accident did happen. (2) means that it is no wonder he won because he had worked for it so hard, and it is not because of luck or coincidence.</div><div class="explanation">A formal expression in the style of written language.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x85265"><span class="number">3. </span>...べくもない</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>多勢</rb><rt>た ぜい</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>無勢</rb><rt>ぶ ぜい</rt></ruby>では<ruby><rb>勝</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>つべくもない。</span>／<span class="translation">Being so outnumbered by our opponents, we have no chance of winning.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>優勝</rb><rt>ゆう しょう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>望</rb><rt>のぞ</rt></ruby>むべくもない。</span>／<span class="translation">There is no hope of coming in first.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>突然</rb><rt>とつ ぜん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>母</rb><rt>はは</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>死</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>を、<ruby><rb>遠</rb><rt>とお</rt></ruby>く<ruby><rb>海外</rb><rt>かい がい</rt></ruby>にいた<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>るべくもなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">Being so far away overseas, there was no way for him to learn of his mother’s sudden death.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means that something is not achievable, cannot be done, or something cannot happen. It is a formal expression in the style of written language, and it is not used very often in modern Japanese.</div></body></html>