<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ぎみ</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0180.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【きっと】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0182.xhtml">【きらいがある】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x14387">【ぎみ】</h1><h4 class="info">［Nぎみ］</h4><h4 class="info">［R-ぎみ］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>ちょっとかぜぎみで、せきが<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>る。</span>／<span class="translation">I have a slight cold and cough.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>はすこし<ruby><rb>緊張</rb><rt>きん ちょう</rt></ruby>ぎみだった。</span>／<span class="translation">She was a little tense.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>ここのところ、すこしつかれぎみで、<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>がはかどらない。</span>／<span class="translation">I’m a little tired these days and I can’t make progress with my work.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>現在</rb><rt>げん ざい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>内閣</rb><rt>ない かく</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>支持率</rb><rt>し じ りつ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>発足時</rb><rt>ほっ そく じ</rt></ruby>よりやや<ruby><rb>下</rb><rt>さ</rt></ruby>がり<ruby><rb>気味</rb><rt>ぎ み</rt></ruby>である。</span>／<span class="translation">The approval rate of the present cabinet is trending a little lower than when it took office.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses a situation or tendency. Often used for negative things.</div></body></html>