<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>にわたって</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0843.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【によれば】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0845.xhtml">【にわたり】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x75118">【にわたって】</h1><h4 class="info">［Nにわたって］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>この<ruby><rb>研究</rb><rt>けん きゅう</rt></ruby>グループは<ruby><rb>水質</rb><rt>すいしつ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>汚染</rb><rt>お せん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>調査</rb><rt>ちょう さ</rt></ruby>を 10 <ruby><rb>年</rb><rt>ねん</rt></ruby>にわたって<ruby><rb>続</rb><rt>つづ</rt></ruby>けてきた。</span>／<span class="translation">This research group has been surveying water pollution over a span of ten years.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>はこの<ruby><rb>町</rb><rt>まち</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>数回</rb><rt>すう かい</rt></ruby>にわたって<ruby><rb>訪</rb><rt>おとず</rt></ruby>れ、ダム<ruby><rb>建設</rb><rt>けん せつ</rt></ruby>についての<ruby><rb>住民</rb><rt>じゅう みん</rt></ruby>との<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はな</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>合</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>いをおこなっている。</span>／<span class="translation">He has visited this town several times and discussed the construction of a dam with the residents.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>首相</rb><rt>しゅ しょう</rt></ruby>はヨーロッパからアメリカ<ruby><rb>大陸</rb><rt>たい りく</rt></ruby>まで8カ<ruby><rb>国</rb><rt>こく</rt></ruby>にわたって<ruby><rb>訪</rb><rt>おとず</rt></ruby>れ、<ruby><rb>経済</rb><rt>けい ざい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>問題</rb><rt>もん だい</rt></ruby>についての<ruby><rb>理解</rb><rt>り かい</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>求</rb><rt>もと</rt></ruby>めた。</span>／<span class="translation">The prime minister has visited eight countries from Europe to the United States, seeking an understanding of economic problems.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>外国人</rb><rt>がい こく じん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>労働者</rb><rt>ろうどうしゃ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>関</rb><rt>かん</rt></ruby>する<ruby><rb>意識</rb><rt>い しき</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>調査</rb><rt>ちょう さ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>質問</rb><rt>しつ もん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>項目</rb><rt>こうもく</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>多岐</rb><rt>た き</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>渡</rb><rt>わた</rt></ruby>っており、とても<ruby><rb>一言</rb><rt>ひと こと</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>説明</rb><rt>せつ めい</rt></ruby>することはできない。</span>／<span class="translation">The questions on the opinion poll regarding foreign workers cover a range of topics, so I really can’t explain them in just a few words.</span></div><div class="explanation">Attaches to a word or phrase that denotes a period of time, number of times, range of places, etc. Expresses that the period/number/range is large. Often followed by verbs like 行う (perform/carry out), 続ける (continue), or 訪れる (visit). Used in written language and/or formal style. </div></body></html>