<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>きわみ</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0186.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【きわまる】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0188.xhtml">【きんじえない】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x14781">【きわみ】</h1><h4 class="info">［Nのきわみ］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>このような<ruby><rb>盛大</rb><rt>せい だい</rt></ruby>なる<ruby><rb>激励会</rb><rt>げき れい かい</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>開</rb><rt>ひら</rt></ruby>いていただき、<ruby><rb>感激</rb><rt>かん げき</rt></ruby>のきわみです。</span>／<span class="translation">I am deeply impressed by such a grand party on my behalf.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>自殺</rb><rt>じ さつ</rt></ruby>してちょうど<ruby><rb>一</rb><rt>いっ</rt></ruby>か<ruby><rb>月</rb><rt>げつ</rt></ruby>たつ。あの<ruby><rb>日</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なに</rt></ruby>か<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はな</rt></ruby>しをしたそうな<ruby><rb>様子</rb><rt>よう す</rt></ruby>だったのに<ruby><rb>忙</rb><rt>いそが</rt></ruby>しくてそのままにしてしまった。いま<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>うと<ruby><rb>痛恨</rb><rt>つう こん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>極</rb><rt>きわ</rt></ruby>みだ。</span>／<span class="translation">One month has passed since he took his own life. It seemed that he wanted to say something on that day, but I was busy and didn’t do anything. When I think of it now, it pains me terribly.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>不慮</rb><rt>ふ りょ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>事故</rb><rt>じ こ</rt></ruby>でわが<ruby><rb>子</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>失</rb><rt>うしな</rt></ruby>った<ruby><rb>母親</rb><rt>はは おや</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>悲嘆</rb><rt>ひ たん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>極</rb><rt>きわ</rt></ruby>みにあった。</span>／<span class="translation">The mother who lost her child in an accident was in the utter depths of grief.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>資産家</rb><rt>し さん か</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>一人</rb><rt>ひとり</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>息子</rb><rt>むすこ</rt></ruby>として、<ruby><rb>贅沢</rb><rt>ぜい たく</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>極</rb><rt>きわ</rt></ruby>みを<ruby><rb>尽</rb><rt>つ</rt></ruby>くしていた。</span>／<span class="translation">Being the only son of the millionaire, he lived a life of luxury.</span></div><div class="explanation">Takes a limited number of nouns, such as 感激 and 痛恨. Expresses an extreme condition.</div></body></html>