<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>てっきり...とおもう</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0467.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【てちょうだい】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0469.xhtml">【てでも】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x42169">【てっきり...とおもう】</h1><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>がいろいろな<ruby><rb>結婚式</rb><rt>けっ こん しき</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>場</rb><rt>じょう</rt></ruby>のパンフレットを<ruby><rb>持</rb><rt>も</rt></ruby>っているので、これはてっきり<ruby><rb>結婚</rb><rt>けっ こん</rt></ruby>するんだと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>ってしまったんです。</span>／<span class="translation">She had all sorts of brochures of places for wedding receptions, so I was convinced she was going to get married.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>倒</rb><rt>たお</rt></ruby>れていたので、てっきり<ruby><rb>事故</rb><rt>じ こ</rt></ruby>だと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>って<ruby><rb>駅員</rb><rt>えき いん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>らせたんです。</span>／<span class="translation">I saw someone lying on the floor and was sure there had been an accident, so I went to tell the station staff.  </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>窓</rb><rt>まど</rt></ruby>ガラスが<ruby><rb>割</rb><rt>わ</rt></ruby>れていたので、これはてっきり<ruby><rb>泥棒</rb><rt>どろ ぼう</rt></ruby>だと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>ったんです。</span>／<span class="translation">I saw the broken window and was sure there had been a robber.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>てっきり<ruby><rb>怒</rb><rt>おこ</rt></ruby>られるものと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>っていたが、<ruby><rb>反対</rb><rt>はん たい</rt></ruby>にほめられたので、<ruby><rb>驚</rb><rt>おどろ</rt></ruby>いた。</span>／<span class="translation">I expected him to be angry at me, so I was surprised to be praised instead.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to explain, after the fact, that the speaker believed something was really true, based on an assumption <span class="noSeparate">s/he</span> had made on the grounds of a piece of evidence or reason. てっきり emphasizes the strength of the conviction. Often the assumption is actually mistaken. Can only be used for assumptions made in the past.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>てっきり帰ったと思っています。／I feel sure you had gone home.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>てっきり帰ったと思いました。／I felt sure you had gone home.</div></body></html>