<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>いかにも</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0035.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【いかに】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0037.xhtml">【いかん】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x3729">【いかにも】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x3731"><span class="number">1. </span>いかにも　...らしい／...そうだ</h2><h3 class="subsubtitle" id="idsubsubtitlex1x3734"><span class="number">a. </span>いかにもNらしい</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>今日</rb><rt>きょう</rt></ruby>はいかにも<ruby><rb>秋</rb><rt>あき</rt></ruby>らしい<ruby><rb>天気</rb><rt>てん き</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">Today feels just like autumn weather.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>はいつもいかにも<ruby><rb>教師</rb><rt>きょう し</rt></ruby>らしい<ruby><rb>服装</rb><rt>ふく そう</rt></ruby>をしている。</span>／<span class="translation">She always dresses just like a teacher. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>その<ruby><rb>家</rb><rt>いえ</rt></ruby>はいかにも<ruby><rb>旧家</rb><rt>きゅう か</rt></ruby>らしく、どっしりとした<ruby><rb>古</rb><rt>ふる</rt></ruby>めかしい<ruby><rb>作</rb><rt>つく</rt></ruby>りだった。</span>／<span class="translation">That house was massive and ancient-looking, just as might be expected of a house belonging to an old, established family.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses that “the typical nature or characteristics of N are well-displayed,” or “N is just as N should be.” いかにもemphasizes the meaning of らしい (like).</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x3765"><span class="number">b. </span>いかにも...そうだ</h3><h4 class="info">［いかにもNa そうだ］</h4><h4 class="info">［いかにもA-そうだ］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>そのサンマはとれたてで、いかにもおいしそうだった。</span>／<span class="translation">The saury was freshly caught and looked really delicious.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>その<ruby><rb>映画</rb><rt>えい が</rt></ruby>はストーリーを<ruby><rb>聞</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>くといかにもおもしろそうなのだが、<ruby><rb>配役</rb><rt>はい やく</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>気</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>らないので<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>く<ruby><rb>気</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>起</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>きない。</span>／<span class="translation">The story of that movie sounds quite interesting, but I don’t feel like going to see it because I don’t like the cast. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>新</rb><rt>あたら</rt></ruby>しい<ruby><rb>電子</rb><rt>でん し</rt></ruby>レンジはいろいろな<ruby><rb>機能</rb><rt>き のう</rt></ruby>がついていかにも<ruby><rb>便利</rb><rt>べん り</rt></ruby>そうだ。</span>／<span class="translation">With all their different functions, the new microwaves are the very picture of convenience.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>サッカーの<ruby><rb>試合</rb><rt>し あい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>見物</rb><rt>けん ぶつ</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>母</rb><rt>はは</rt></ruby>はいかにも<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>きたくなさそうな<ruby><rb>様子</rb><rt>よう す</rt></ruby>をしていたが、<ruby><rb>結局</rb><rt>けっ きょく</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>一番</rb><rt>いち ばん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>楽</rb><rt>たの</rt></ruby>しんでいたのは<ruby><rb>母</rb><rt>はは</rt></ruby>だった。</span>／<span class="translation">My mother looked like she wasn’t at all interested in going to watch the soccer game, but in the end she was the one who enjoyed it the most.</span></div><div class="explanation">When いかにも is followed by the stem of an adjective plus そうだ, it means “as far as I can see, it seems very....” The meaning そうだ is emphasized because of いかにも. </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x3806"><span class="number">2. </span>いかにも</h2><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>結局</rb><rt>けっ きょく</rt></ruby>、この<ruby><rb>計画</rb><rt>けい かく</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>成功</rb><rt>せい こう</rt></ruby>するかしないかは、<ruby><rb>地域</rb><rt>ち いき</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>住民</rb><rt>じゅう みん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>方々</rb><rt>かた がた</rt></ruby>がどう<ruby><rb>反応</rb><rt>はん のう</rt></ruby>するかにかかっているわけですね。</span>／<span class="translation">At the end of the day, whether this plan will succeed or not depends on how the local residents react, right?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>いかにもその<ruby><rb>通</rb><rt>とお</rt></ruby>りです。ですから、<ruby><rb>予測</rb><rt>よ そく</rt></ruby>がつかないと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>っているのですよ。</span>／<span class="translation">That’s just it. That’s why I’m saying we can’t predict the outcome.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><span class="number">A:</span>この<ruby><rb>指輪</rb><rt>ゆび わ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>特別</rb><rt>とく べつ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>作</rb><rt>つく</rt></ruby>らせたものでございますか。</span>／<span class="translation">Is this the ring that you had specially made?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>いかにも。<ruby><rb>宝石</rb><rt>ほう せき</rt></ruby>のデザインでは<ruby><rb>右</rb><rt>みぎ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>るものはいないという<ruby><rb>優</rb><rt>すぐ</rt></ruby>れた<ruby><rb>職人</rb><rt>しょく にん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>頼</rb><rt>たの</rt></ruby>んだものだ。</span>／<span class="translation">   That’s right. I ordered it from an excellent craftsman who is second to none at designing jewelry.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “that’s true” or “that’s right” and is used to express agreement with the speaker. It is spoken language, but an old-fashioned expression. いかにもin (2) is an old way of speaking used by men, so women and young men seldom use this expression now. </div></body></html>