<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>とおもう</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0558.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【とおす】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0560.xhtml">【とおり】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x52350">【とおもう】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x52352"><span class="number">1. </span>...かとおもうほど</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は、いつ<ruby><rb>寝</rb><rt>ね</rt></ruby>ているのかと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>うほどいそがしそうだ。</span>／<span class="translation">He seems so busy that it makes me wonder when he sleeps.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>その<ruby><rb>家</rb><rt>いえ</rt></ruby>は、ほかに<ruby><rb>金</rb><rt>かね</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>使</rb><rt>つか</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>道</rb><rt>みち</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>いつかなかったのだろうかと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>うほど、<ruby><rb>金</rb><rt>かね</rt></ruby>のかかったつくりだった。</span>／<span class="translation">That house cost so much to build that it makes me wonder if they couldn't think of any other ways to spend their money.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>その<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>のあいさつは、<ruby><rb>永遠</rb><rt>えい えん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>終</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>わらないのではないかと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>うほど<ruby><rb>長</rb><rt>なが</rt></ruby>いものだった。</span>／<span class="translation">That person’s opening remarks were so long that we wondered if they might go on forever. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>死</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>んでしまうのではないかと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>うほどの<ruby><rb>厳</rb><rt>きび</rt></ruby>しい<ruby><rb>修行</rb><rt>しゅ ぎょう</rt></ruby>だった。</span>／<span class="translation">The training was so rigorous that we wondered if it might kill us. </span></div><div class="explanation">Means “so outrageous that it makes people wonder such-and-such.” The form Xかと思うほど（の）Y is used to emphasize the high degree of Y. Sometimes the form ...かと思うほどだ is also used, as in the following example.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>彼はいそがしい。いつ寝ているのかと思うほどだ。／He is busy. So much so that it makes me wonder when he sleeps. </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x52398"><span class="number">2. </span>...かとおもえば</h2><h3 class="subsubtitle" id="idsubsubtitlex1x52401"><span class="number">a. </span>V-るかとおもえば</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>勉強</rb><rt>べん きょう</rt></ruby>しているかと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>えば<ruby><rb>漫画</rb><rt>まん が</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>読</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>んでいる。</span>／<span class="translation">There she was reading comic books, when I thought she was studying!</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>るかと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>うと<ruby><rb>欠席</rb><rt>けっ せき</rt></ruby>だし、<ruby><rb>休</rb><rt>やす</rt></ruby>むかと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>うと<ruby><rb>出席</rb><rt>しゅっ せき</rt></ruby>している。</span>／<span class="translation">When I think he’ll come, he’s absent, and when I think he'll be absent, he attends. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>今年</rb><rt>ことし</rt></ruby>こそ<ruby><rb>冷夏</rb><rt>れい か</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>えば、<ruby><rb>猛暑</rb><rt>もう しょ</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>毎日</rb><rt>まい にち</rt></ruby>うだるような<ruby><rb>暑</rb><rt>あつ</rt></ruby>さだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Just when I thought we’d have a cool summer this year, there’s a heat wave and every day is a scorcher.</span></div><div class="explanation">The forms V-るかとおもえば and V-るかとおもうと are used to express that the present situation is contrary to the speaker’s expectations. Since these express that an unexpected situation occurs repeatedly and/or that the present situation is contrary to expectation, they are typically followed by the dictionary form at the end of the sentence. This usage does not usually take the form かと思ったら.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x52432"><span class="number">b. </span>V-るかとおもえば...も</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>熱心</rb><rt>ねっ しん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>授業</rb><rt>じゅ ぎょう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>る<ruby><rb>学生</rb><rt>がく せい</rt></ruby>がいるかと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>えば、<ruby><rb>全然</rb><rt>ぜん ぜん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>出席</rb><rt>しゅっ せき</rt></ruby>せずに<ruby><rb>試験</rb><rt>し けん</rt></ruby>だけ<ruby><rb>受</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>けるような<ruby><rb>学生</rb><rt>がく せい</rt></ruby>もいる。</span>／<span class="translation">There are students who enthusiastically come to class, and there are students who never come to class but just take the final exam. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>一日</rb><rt>いち にち</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>原稿</rb><rt>げん こう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>用紙</rb><rt>よう し</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>向</rb><rt>む</rt></ruby>かっていても<ruby><rb>一枚</rb><rt>いち まい</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>書</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>けない<ruby><rb>日</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby>があるかと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>うと、<ruby><rb>一気</rb><rt>いっ き</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>数</rb><rt>すう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>十枚</rb><rt>じゅう まい</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>書</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>ける<ruby><rb>日</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby>もある。</span>／<span class="translation">While there are some days when you sit staring at the manuscript paper all day long without being able to write a single page, there are also days when you can dash off dozens of pages at a stretch. </span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses the parallel existence of conflicting or contrasting situations. Can also take the form V-るかとおもうと. Often verbs of existence like ある, いる, etc. are repeated. While the pattern V-るかとおもえば (see a, above) expresses a gap between expectation and reality, the pattern here doesn’t have such a meaning. It merely presents a comparison between two situations of a different nature. </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x52457"><span class="number">3. </span>...からとおもって</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>体</rb><rt>からだ</rt></ruby>にいいからと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>って、<ruby><rb>緑</rb><rt>みどり</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>野菜</rb><rt>や さい</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べるようにしています。</span>／<span class="translation">I believe it's good for the health, so I make it a point to eat green vegetables.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>せっかくパリまで<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>たのだからと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>って、<ruby><rb>一流</rb><rt>いち りゅう</rt></ruby>レストランで<ruby><rb>食事</rb><rt>しょく じ</rt></ruby>することにした。</span>／<span class="translation">I figured that since I’d come all the way to Paris, I should have dinner at a first-class restaurant. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>明日</rb><rt>あした</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>試験</rb><rt>し けん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>遅</rb><rt>おく</rt></ruby>れては<ruby><rb>大変</rb><rt>たい へん</rt></ruby>だからと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>い、<ruby><rb>今晩</rb><rt>こん ばん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>早寝</rb><rt>はや ね</rt></ruby>することにした。</span>／<span class="translation">I know that it would never do to be late for tomorrow's exam, so I’m going to bed early tonight.</span></div><div class="explanation">Follows a clause and means that an action is or will be taken on account of the reason expressed in that clause. The reason given in the first clause typically expresses something that will happen as a result of the action in the second clause (i.e. the aim of the action). In the second clause, an expression that indicates intentional action is used.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x52488"><span class="number">4. </span>...とおもったら</h2><h3 class="subsubtitle" id="idsubsubtitlex1x52491"><span class="number">a. </span>V-たとおもったら</h3><h4 class="reference">→<a href="part0559.xhtml#idsubsubtitlex1x52659">【とおもう】9b</a></h4><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x52500"><span class="number">b. </span><ruby><rb>疑</rb><rt>ぎ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>問</rb><rt>もん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>詞</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>...かとおもったら</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なに</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>うのかと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>ったらそんなくだらないことか。</span>／<span class="translation">Who would have thought she would end up saying such a stupid thing?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>食事</rb><rt>しょく じ</rt></ruby>もしないで<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なに</rt></ruby>をやってるのかと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>ったら、テレビゲームか。</span>／<span class="translation">I was wondering what he was doing that was so important that he had to skip dinner, and it turned out to be a video game.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>会議中</rb><rt>かい ぎ ちゅう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>席</rb><rt>せき</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>立</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>ってどこへ<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>くのかと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>ったら、ちょっと<ruby><rb>空</rb><rt>そら</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>たいって<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>うんだよ。あいつ、<ruby><rb>最近</rb><rt>さい きん</rt></ruby>おかしいよ。</span>／<span class="translation">I was wondering why he stepped out of the meeting, and he said he just wanted to take a look at the sky. That guy’s really been strange lately. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>2<ruby><rb>才</rb><rt>さい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>赤</rb><rt>あか</rt></ruby>ん<ruby><rb>坊</rb><rt>ぼう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>夢中</rb><rt>む ちゅう</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なに</rt></ruby>かやっている。<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なに</rt></ruby>をやっているのかと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>ったら、<ruby><rb>鏡</rb><rt>かがみ</rt></ruby>にむかってにこにこ<ruby><rb>笑</rb><rt>わら</rt></ruby>ったり、<ruby><rb>手</rb><rt>て</rt></ruby>をふったりしているのだ。</span>／<span class="translation">The two-year-old child was completely absorbed in something.  When I went to see what she was doing, I saw her looking into the mirror, grinning and waving.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses that the speaker has directed <span class="noSeparate">his/her</span> attention to something that <span class="noSeparate">s/he</span> thinks is strange or unusual. The latter part of the sentence expresses an unexpected discovery or a surprising event.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x52537"><span class="number">5. </span>...たいとおもう<span class="reference">→<a href="part0101.xhtml#idtitlex1x8514">【おもう】</a></span></h2><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x52544"><span class="number">6. </span>...とおもいきや</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>今場所</rb><rt>こん ば しょ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>横綱</rb><rt>よこ づな</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>優勝</rb><rt>ゆう しょう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>間違</rb><rt>ま ちが</rt></ruby>いなしと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>いきや、3<ruby><rb>日目</rb><rt>か め</rt></ruby>にケガで<ruby><rb>休場</rb><rt>きゅう じょう</rt></ruby>することになってしまった。</span>／<span class="translation">I was sure this <i>sumoo</i> tournament would be won by the <i>y</i><i>okozuna</i><i> </i>(grand champion), and then on the third day he withdrew because of an injury. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>今年</rb><rt>ことし</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>夏</rb><rt>なつ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>猛暑</rb><rt>もう しょ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>続</rb><rt>つづ</rt></ruby>くと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>いきや、<ruby><rb>連日</rb><rt>れん じつ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>雨</rb><rt>あめ</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>冷害</rb><rt>れい がい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>心配</rb><rt>しん ぱい</rt></ruby>さえでてきた。</span>／<span class="translation">Just when I expected that the heat wave would continue this summer, we had so many days of rain that now there are even concerns about cold-weather damage to the crops. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>これで<ruby><rb>一件</rb><rt>いっけん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>落着</rb><rt>らくちゃく</rt></ruby>かと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>いきや、<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>いがけない<ruby><rb>反対</rb><rt>はん たい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>意見</rb><rt>い けん</rt></ruby>で、この<ruby><rb>件</rb><rt>けん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>次回</rb><rt>じ かい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>会議</rb><rt>かい ぎ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>持</rb><rt>も</rt></ruby>ち<ruby><rb>越</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>されることになった。</span>／<span class="translation">I thought this would settle the matter, but there was unexpected opposition, so the issue has been tabled until the next meeting. </span></div><div class="explanation">Follows a clause and means that, although the speaker had expected the outcome expressed in that clause, the actual outcome was, to <span class="noSeparate">his/her</span> surprise, the opposite. As in (3), sometimes the particle か appears right before と. A somewhat old-fashioned expression used in written language. </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x52585"><span class="number">7. </span>...とおもう<span class="reference">→<a href="part0101.xhtml#idtitlex1x8514">【おもう】</a></span></h2><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x52592"><span class="number">8. </span>...とおもうまもなく</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>つめたい<ruby><rb>雨</rb><rt>あめ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>降</rb><rt>ふ</rt></ruby>ってきたと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>う<ruby><rb>間</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>もなく、それは<ruby><rb>雪</rb><rt>ゆき</rt></ruby>にかわった。</span>／<span class="translation">Just as I thought a cold rain had started to fall, it turned to snow.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>両目</rb><rt>りょう め</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>涙</rb><rt>なみだ</rt></ruby>があふれてきたかと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>う<ruby><rb>間</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>もなく、その<ruby><rb>子</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>大声</rb><rt>おお ごえ</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>泣</rb><rt>な</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>だ</rt></ruby>した。</span>／<span class="translation">The child’s eyes welled up with tears, and a loud outburst of wailing immediately followed. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>帰</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>ってきたなと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>う<ruby><rb>間</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>もなく<ruby><rb>息子</rb><rt>むすこ</rt></ruby>は「<ruby><rb>遊</rb><rt>あそ</rt></ruby>びに<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ってくる！」と<ruby><rb>叫</rb><rt>さけ</rt></ruby>んで<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>ていった。</span>／<span class="translation">I had hardly welcomed my son home when he cried, "I'm going out to play!" and left. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>雲</rb><rt>くも</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>突</rb><rt>つ</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>抜</rb><rt>ぬ</rt></ruby>けたと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>う<ruby><rb>間</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>もなく、<ruby><rb>翼</rb><rt>つばさ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>下</rb><rt>した</rt></ruby>に、<ruby><rb>街</rb><rt>まち</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>灯</rb><rt>あかり</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>広</rb><rt>ひろ</rt></ruby>がった。</span>／<span class="translation">Just as we broke through the clouds, the city lights spread out beneath the wings of the plane. </span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses two events occurring in succession without a break in time. Sometimes the particle か appears right before と. Used in written language. In the pattern XかとおもうまもなくY (I hardly thought X had happened when Y occurred), neither the X clause nor the Y clause can express an action done by the speaker. </div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>私はうちに帰ったかと思う間もなく友達に電話した。／I hardly thought I had come home when I telephoned a friend.  </div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>私は家に帰るとすぐ友達に電話した。／I telephoned a friend right after arriving home. </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x52647"><span class="number">9. </span>...とおもうと</h2><h3 class="subsubtitle" id="idsubsubtitlex1x52650"><span class="number">a. </span>V-るかとおもうと</h3><h4 class="reference">→<a href="part0559.xhtml#idsubsubtitlex1x52401">【とおもう】2a</a></h4><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x52659"><span class="number">b. </span>V-たとおもうと</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>急</rb><rt>きゅう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>空</rb><rt>そら</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>暗</rb><rt>くら</rt></ruby>くなったかと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>うと、<ruby><rb>大粒</rb><rt>おお つぶ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>雨</rb><rt>あめ</rt></ruby>がふってきた。</span>／<span class="translation">I had just realized how dark the sky had become when large drops of rain started to fall. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>山田</rb><rt>やま だ</rt></ruby>さんたら、<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>たと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>ったらすぐ<ruby><rb>帰</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>っちゃった。</span>／<span class="translation">That Yamada-san went home right after she got here. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>さっきまで<ruby><rb>泣</rb><rt>な</rt></ruby>いていたと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>ったらもう<ruby><rb>笑</rb><rt>わら</rt></ruby>っている。</span>／<span class="translation">Until just a moment ago he was in tears, but now there is already a smile on his face. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>やっと<ruby><rb>暖</rb><rt>あたた</rt></ruby>かくなったかと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>うと、<ruby><rb>今朝</rb><rt>け さ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>突然</rb><rt>とつ ぜん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>春</rb><rt>はる</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>雪</rb><rt>ゆき</rt></ruby>でびっくりした。</span>／<span class="translation">I thought it was finally getting warm, so I was surprised this morning at the sudden spring snowfall. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>夫</rb><rt>おっと</rt></ruby>はさっき<ruby><rb>家</rb><rt>いえ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>戻</rb><rt>もど</rt></ruby>ってきたかと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>ったら、<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>らぬ<ruby><rb>間</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>にまた<ruby><rb>出掛</rb><rt>で か</rt></ruby>けていた。</span>／<span class="translation">I thought my husband had just come home, but before I knew it, he had gone out again. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>までニコニコしていたかと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>えば、<ruby><rb>突然</rb><rt>とつ ぜん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>泣</rb><rt>な</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>だ</rt></ruby>したりして、<ruby><rb>本当</rb><rt>ほん  とう</rt></ruby>に、よく<ruby><rb>気分</rb><rt>き ぶん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>変</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>わる<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">Just when you think that up till now she’s been all smiles, all of a sudden she bursts out crying and stuff; really, she’s such a temperamental person.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（7）</span>ちょっとうとうとしたかと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>うと、<ruby><rb>突然</rb><rt>とつ ぜん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>きな<ruby><rb>物音</rb><rt>もの おと</rt></ruby>がして<ruby><rb>目</rb><rt>め</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>覚</rb><rt>さ</rt></ruby>めた。</span>／<span class="translation">Just as I felt myself nodding off, suddenly there was a loud noise and I woke up. </span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses the successive but virtually simultaneous occurrence of two contrasting situations. The forms V-たとおもったら and V-たとおもえば can also be used, and the form V-たかとおもったら is common too. In many cases, this pattern is followed by an expression that refers to the speaker's shock or surprise. Cannot be used to describe the actions of the speaker <span class="noSeparate">him/her</span>self. </div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>私は、うちに帰ったと思うとまた出かけた。／I thought I had just come home when I went out again.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>私は、うちに帰って、またすぐに出かけた。／I came home and soon went out again. </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x52732"><span class="number">10. </span>...とおもったものの  <span class="reference">→<a href="part1008.xhtml#idsubtitlex1x99788">【ものの】1</a></span></h2><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x52740"><span class="number">11. </span>Nにとおもって</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>おばあちゃんへのお<ruby><rb>土産</rb><rt>みやげ</rt></ruby>にと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>って、<ruby><rb>湯飲</rb><rt>ゆ の</rt></ruby>み<ruby><rb>茶碗</rb><rt>ぢゃ わん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>った。</span>／<span class="translation">I bought a Japanese teacup as a souvenir for my grandmother. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>つまらないものですが、これ、お<ruby><rb>子</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>さんにと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>って...。</span>／<span class="translation">It’s just a little something I thought your child might like....</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>健康</rb><rt>けん こう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>維持</rb><rt>い じ</rt></ruby>にと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>い、<ruby><rb>水泳</rb><rt>すい えい</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>始</rb><rt>はじ</rt></ruby>めた。</span>／<span class="translation">To keep fit, I started swimming. </span></div><div class="explanation">Used with nouns that refer to a person or a purpose/goal and means “for that person or purpose.” Followed by an expression of intentional action. Can also be used in the form ...にと思い.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x52771"><span class="number">12. </span>...ものとおもう<span class="reference">→<a href="part1004.xhtml#idtitlex1x99541">【ものとおもう】</a></span></h2><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x52778"><span class="number">13. </span>...ようとおもう<span class="reference">→<a href="part0101.xhtml#idsubtitlex1x8815">【おもう】5</a></span></h2></body></html>