<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>わけだ</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part1053.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【わけがない】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part1055.xhtml">【わけではない】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x106235">【わけだ】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x106240"><span class="number">1. </span>...わけだ〈monologue-type〉</h2><h4 class="info">［N　な／である　わけだ］</h4><h4 class="info">［Na なわけだ］</h4><h4 class="info">［A／V　わけだ］</h4><div class="explanation">States a logically-derived conclusion from a fact or situation showing a previous utterance or context. Used in cases where the speaker or writer is explaining or elucidating something.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x106262"><span class="number">a. </span>...わけだ〈conclusion〉</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>イギリスとは<ruby><rb>時差</rb><rt>じ さ</rt></ruby>が8<ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby>あるから、<ruby><rb>日本</rb><rt>に ほん</rt></ruby>が 11 <ruby><rb>時</rb><rt>じ</rt></ruby>ならイギリスは3<ruby><rb>時</rb><rt>じ</rt></ruby>なわけだ。</span>／<span class="translation">As there is an eight hour time difference between the United Kingdom and Japan, if it is eleven o’clock in Japan, it will be three o’clock in the United Kingdom.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>体重</rb><rt>たい じゅう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>測</rb><rt>はか</rt></ruby>ったら 52 キロになっていた。<ruby><rb>先週</rb><rt>せん しゅう</rt></ruby>は 49 キロだったから、<ruby><rb>一週間</rb><rt>いっ しゅう かん</rt></ruby>で3キロも<ruby><rb>太</rb><rt>ふと</rt></ruby>ってしまったわけだ。</span>／<span class="translation">When I weighed myself I weighed 52 kilograms. I weighed 49 kilograms last week and so it means that I’ve put on three kilograms in one week.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>最近</rb><rt>さい きん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>円高</rb><rt>えん だか</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>進</rb><rt>すす</rt></ruby>んで、<ruby><rb>輸入品</rb><rt>ゆ にゅう ひん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>値段</rb><rt>ね だん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>下</rb><rt>さ</rt></ruby>がっている。だから<ruby><rb>洋書</rb><rt>よう しょ</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>安</rb><rt>やす</rt></ruby>くなっているわけだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Recently the value of the yen has been increasing and so the price of imported goods is going down. This means Western books are also getting cheaper.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>中国</rb><rt>ちゅう ごく</rt></ruby>で3<ruby><rb>年間</rb><rt>ねん かん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>働</rb><rt>はたら</rt></ruby>いていたので、<ruby><rb>中国</rb><rt>ちゅう ごく</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>事情</rb><rt>じ じょう</rt></ruby>にかなり<ruby><rb>詳</rb><rt>くわ</rt></ruby>しいわけである。</span>／<span class="translation">She worked in China for three years and so she’s quite knowledgeable about the Chinese situation.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>昔</rb><rt>むかし</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>機械類</rb><rt>き かい るい</rt></ruby>をさわるのが<ruby><rb>苦手</rb><rt>にが て</rt></ruby>です。だから<ruby><rb>未</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>だにコンピュータも<ruby><rb>使</rb><rt>つか</rt></ruby>えないわけです。</span>／<span class="translation">I’ve always been bad with machines and so, to this day, I can’t even use a computer.  </span></div><div class="explanation">Takes the form X。(だから)Yわけだ. Shows that Y is the natural course of development from X, or is an inevitable conclusion. It is often used together with phrases such as だから, から and ので.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x106308"><span class="number">b. </span>...わけだ〈restatement〉</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>父親</rb><rt>ちち おや</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>母</rb><rt>はは</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>弟</rb><rt>おとうと</rt></ruby>だ。つまり<ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>はいとこ<ruby><rb>同士</rb><rt>どう し</rt></ruby>なわけだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Her father is my mother’s younger brother. That is to say, we are cousins.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>はフランスの<ruby><rb>有名</rb><rt>ゆう めい</rt></ruby>なレストランで5<ruby><rb>年間</rb><rt>ねん かん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>料理</rb><rt>りょう り</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>修行</rb><rt>しゅ ぎょう</rt></ruby>をしたそうだ。つまりプロの<ruby><rb>料理人</rb><rt>りょう り にん</rt></ruby>であるわけだ。</span>／<span class="translation">I hear that she spent five years training in a famous French restaurant. In other words, she’s a professional chef.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>大学</rb><rt>だい がく</rt></ruby>へ<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>っても<ruby><rb>部室</rb><rt>ぶ しつ</rt></ruby>でギターの<ruby><rb>練習</rb><rt>れん しゅう</rt></ruby>ばかりしている。<ruby><rb>要</rb><rt>よう</rt></ruby>するに<ruby><rb>講義</rb><rt>こう ぎ</rt></ruby>にはほとんど<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>ていないわけだが、それでもなぜか<ruby><rb>単位</rb><rt>たん い</rt></ruby>はきちんと<ruby><rb>取</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>れているらしい。</span>／<span class="translation">Even though he goes to school, he just practices his guitar in his room all the time. In other words, he hardly ever goes to his lectures but, even so, somehow he seems to pick up the credits he needs.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>父</rb><rt>ちち</rt></ruby>は 20 <ruby><rb>年</rb><rt>ねん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>前</rb><rt>まえ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>運転</rb><rt>うん てん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>免許</rb><rt>めんきょ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>取</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>っていたが<ruby><rb>車</rb><rt>くるま</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>持</rb><rt>も</rt></ruby>っていなかった。つまり<ruby><rb>長</rb><rt>なが</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>間</rb><rt>あいだ</rt></ruby>ペーパードライバーだったわけだ。</span>／<span class="translation">My father got his driver’s license twenty years ago but didn’t have a car. That is, for a long time he was a driver only on paper.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>はおいしいものを<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べている<ruby><rb>時</rb><rt>とき</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>一番</rb><rt>いち ばん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>幸</rb><rt>しあわ</rt></ruby>せである。<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>いかえれば、まずいものを<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べることほどいやなことはないわけで、それが<ruby><rb>強制</rb><rt>きょう せい</rt></ruby>されたものだとなおさらである。</span>／<span class="translation">I’m happiest when eating something delicious. In other words, there’s nothing I like less than eating something bad, and if I’m forced to, then it’s even worse.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used in the form X。（つまり）Yわけだ, Shows that X and Y are the same thing and that X can be said in other words as Y.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x106354"><span class="number">c. </span>...わけだ〈reason〉</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>今年</rb><rt>ことし</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>米</rb><rt>こめ</rt></ruby>のできが<ruby><rb>良</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>くなかった。<ruby><rb>冷夏</rb><rt>れい か</rt></ruby>だったわけだ。</span>／<span class="translation">The quality of this year’s rice was poor. It’s because it was a cool summer.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>猫</rb><rt>ねこ</rt></ruby>を3<ruby><rb>匹</rb><rt>びき</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>犬</rb><rt>いぬ</rt></ruby>を1<ruby><rb>匹</rb><rt>ぴき</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>飼</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>っている。<ruby><rb>一人</rb><rt>ひとり</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>暮</rb><rt>ぐ</rt></ruby>らしで<ruby><rb>寂</rb><rt>さび</rt></ruby>しいわけだ。</span>／<span class="translation">She keeps three cats and one dog. It’s because she is living alone and is lonely.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>姉</rb><rt>あね</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>休</rb><rt>やす</rt></ruby>みの<ruby><rb>度</rb><rt>たび</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>海外旅行</rb><rt>かい がい りょ こう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>かける。<ruby><rb>日常</rb><rt>にち じょう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>空間</rb><rt>くう かん</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>脱出</rb><rt>だっ しゅつ</rt></ruby>したいわけだ。</span>／<span class="translation">When there’s a holiday my older sister goes on a trip abroad. It’s because she wants to escape from her everyday life.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>山田</rb><rt>やま だ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>君</rb><rt>くん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>就職難</rb><rt>しゅう しょく なん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>乗</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>り<ruby><rb>越</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>えて<ruby><rb>大企業</rb><rt>だい き ぎょう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>就職</rb><rt>しゅう しょく</rt></ruby>したのに、<ruby><rb>結局</rb><rt>けっ きょく</rt></ruby>3<ruby><rb>ヶ</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>月</rb><rt>げつ</rt></ruby>でやめてしまった。<ruby><rb>本当</rb><rt>ほん  とう</rt></ruby>にやりたかった<ruby><rb>音楽</rb><rt>おん がく</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>関係</rb><rt>かん けい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>をめざすことにしたわけだが、<ruby><rb>音楽</rb><rt>おん がく</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>業界</rb><rt>ぎょう かい</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>就職</rb><rt>しゅう しょく</rt></ruby>はむずかしそうなので、<ruby><rb>心配</rb><rt>しん ぱい</rt></ruby>している。</span>／<span class="translation">Even though Yamada-kun overcame the job shortage and was employed by a large company, in the end he quit after three months. He did it because he decided to try to find a music-related job he really wants to do, but it seems that finding work is difficult in the music field too and so he’s worried.  </span></div><div class="explanation">Takes the form X。Yわけだ. Means that Y is the cause of X.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x106394"><span class="number">d. </span>...わけだ〈claim of fact〉</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>4<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>にん</rt></ruby>とも<ruby><rb>車</rb><rt>くるま</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>るわけだから、うちの<ruby><rb>前</rb><rt>まえ</rt></ruby>にずらっと4<ruby><rb>台</rb><rt>だい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>路上</rb><rt>ろ じょう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>駐車</rb><rt>ちゅう しゃ</rt></ruby>することになるね。</span>／<span class="translation">As four people are arriving by car, I suppose there will be four cars parked in a line on the street in front of my house.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>古本屋</rb><rt>ふる ほん や</rt></ruby>めぐりが<ruby><rb>好</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>きで、<ruby><rb>暇</rb><rt>ひま</rt></ruby>があると<ruby><rb>古本屋</rb><rt>ふる ほん や</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>回</rb><rt>まわ</rt></ruby>っては<ruby><rb>掘</rb><rt>ほ</rt></ruby>り<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>だ</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>物</rb><rt>もの</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>探</rb><rt>さが</rt></ruby>しているわけですが、このごろはいい<ruby><rb>古本屋</rb><rt>ふる ほん や</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>少</rb><rt>すく</rt></ruby>なくなってきたので<ruby><rb>残念</rb><rt>ざん ねん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>っています。</span>／<span class="translation">I like to look around second hand bookstores, so when I have free time, I go looking for bargains in them, but unfortunately there are fewer good second hand bookstores nowadays. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>国際</rb><rt>こく さい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>交流</rb><rt>こう りゅう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>関係</rb><rt>かん けい</rt></ruby>のボランティア<ruby><rb>活動</rb><rt>かつ どう</rt></ruby>はすでに 10 <ruby><rb>年</rb><rt>ねん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>近</rb><rt>ちか</rt></ruby>くやってきているわけでして、<ruby><rb>自慢</rb><rt>じ まん</rt></ruby>じゃありませんが、みなさんよりもずっと<ruby><rb>経験</rb><rt>けい けん</rt></ruby>はあるわけです。そういう<ruby><rb>立場</rb><rt>たち ば</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>者</rb><rt>もの</rt></ruby>としてご<ruby><rb>提案</rb><rt>てい あん</rt></ruby>させていただいているわけです。</span>／<span class="translation">I have been doing international exchange-related volunteer work for already ten years. I don’t mean to boast, but it’s from that position of being by far the most experienced that I make this proposal.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>ねえ、<ruby><rb>聞</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>いてくれる。<ruby><rb>昨日</rb><rt>きのう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>駅前</rb><rt>えき まえ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>自転車</rb><rt>じ てん しゃ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>置</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>いて<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>物</rb><rt>もの</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ったんだけど、<ruby><rb>帰</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>ってきたらなくなってるわけ。あちこち<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>てみたけど<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>つからなくて、しょうがないから<ruby><rb>警察</rb><rt>けい さつ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ったわけよ。そしたら「<ruby><rb>鍵</rb><rt>かぎ</rt></ruby>かけてなかったんじゃないの」なんて<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>われちゃって...。</span>／<span class="translation">Hey, listen to this. Yesterday, I leave my bike in front of the station and go shopping, but when I come back, it’s gone. I look here and there but can’t find it and so the only thing I can do is to go to the police. And then, they tell me something like “Well, you probably didn’t lock it....”</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to insist on or emphasize that what one is saying is a fact with a logical foundation. Often used in speech and, especially even in cases where there is no logical basis for what is being said, it is often used as a sentence-ending particle. Frequently used when attempting to persuade another person by telling him what your thinking is.  </div><div class="explanation">As in examples (2), (3) and (4), used even when the listener does not know the truth, and in such cases can seem pushy, meaning “I think you know it too but....”</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x106444"><span class="number">2. </span>...わけだ〈dialogue-type〉</h2><div class="explanation">Used to state the logical conclusion after accepting another person’s utterance. There are two possible situations for this: one is for the speaker to confirm the conclusion with the other person and the other is for the speaker to accept the conclusion as a fact based on the logical substantiation of the discourse of the other person. </div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x106460"><span class="number">a. </span>...わけだ〈conclusion〉</h3><h4 class="info">［それなら...わけだ］</h4><h4 class="info">［それじゃ...わけだ］</h4><h4 class="info">［じゃ...わけだ］</h4><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>森</rb><rt>もり</rt></ruby>さんは8<ruby><rb>年</rb><rt>ねん</rt></ruby>もフィンランドに<ruby><rb>留学</rb><rt>りゅう がく</rt></ruby>していたそうですよ。</span>／<span class="translation">I hear that Mori-san has been to Finland to study for eight years.  </span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>へえ、そうなんですか。それならフィンランド<ruby><rb>語</rb><rt>ご</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>得意</rb><rt>とく い</rt></ruby>なわけですね。</span>／<span class="translation">Wow, really? If that’s the case, she must be really good at Finnish.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>明日</rb><rt>あ す</rt></ruby>から2<ruby><rb>泊</rb><rt>はく</rt></ruby>3<ruby><rb>日</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>熱海</rb><rt>あたみ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>温泉</rb><rt>おん せん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>くの。</span>／<span class="translation">From tomorrow, I’m going to a hot spring in Atami for two nights, three days.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>へえ、いいわね。じゃ、その<ruby><rb>間</rb><rt>あいだ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>のストレスからは<ruby><rb>解放</rb><rt>かい ほう</rt></ruby>されるわけね。</span>／<span class="translation">Wow, that’s great. While you’re there you should get relief from your work stress.  </span></div><div class="explanation">Used in the form それなら／それじゃ／じゃ...わけだ, taking what the other person says, this shows the inevitable conclusion.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x106518"><span class="number">b. </span>...わけだ〈restatement〉</h3><h4 class="info">［つまり...わけだ］</h4><h4 class="info">［ようするに...わけだ］</h4><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><span class="number">A:</span>この<ruby><rb>間</rb><rt>あいだ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>書</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>いた<ruby><rb>小説</rb><rt>しょう せつ</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>文学賞</rb><rt>ぶん がく しょう</rt></ruby>がもらえたよ。</span>／<span class="translation">The other day, I received a literary prize for the novel which I wrote.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>あなたもようやく<ruby><rb>実力</rb><rt>じつ りょく</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>認</rb><rt>みと</rt></ruby>められたわけね。</span>／<span class="translation">At last, your real ability has been acknowledged.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>田中</rb><rt>た なか</rt></ruby>くん、<ruby><rb>富士山</rb><rt>ふ じ さん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>登山</rb><rt>と ざん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>くのやめるんだって。<ruby><rb>帰</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>った<ruby><rb>次</rb><rt>つぎ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>日</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby>がゼミの<ruby><rb>発表</rb><rt>はっ ぴょう</rt></ruby>だから<ruby><rb>準備</rb><rt>じゅん び</rt></ruby>しなくちゃいけないらしいよ。</span>／<span class="translation">Apparently, Tanaka-kun has decided not to climb <i>Fuji-san</i> (Mount Fuji). It seems that he has to prepare for a seminar presentation the next day.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>ふうん。<ruby><rb>要</rb><rt>よう</rt></ruby>するに<ruby><rb>体力</rb><rt>たい りょく</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>自信</rb><rt>じ しん</rt></ruby>がないわけね。</span>／<span class="translation">Humph. In other words, he has no confidence in his physical strength.</span></div><div class="explanation">Takes the form つまり／要するに...わけだ. Used to rephrase something another person has just said.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x106577"><span class="number">c. </span>...わけだ〈reason〉</h3><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>川本</rb><rt>かわ もと</rt></ruby>さん、<ruby><rb>車</rb><rt>くるま</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>きいのに<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>いかえたらしいよ。</span>／<span class="translation">Kawamoto-san seems to have bought a new car even though the old one was so big.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>へえ。<ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>生</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>まれて<ruby><rb>前</rb><rt>まえ</rt></ruby>のが<ruby><rb>小</rb><rt>ちい</rt></ruby>さくなったわけだな。</span>／<span class="translation">Really? The one he had before his child was born must have gotten too small.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">A:</span>いや、そうじゃなくて、<ruby><rb>単</rb><rt>たん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>新車</rb><rt>しん しゃ</rt></ruby>がほしくなっただけのことらしいけど。</span>／<span class="translation">No, that’s not it. It seems he just wanted a new car.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><span class="number">A:</span>ぼく、<ruby><rb>今度</rb><rt>こん ど</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>一軒家</rb><rt>いっ けん や</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>引</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby>っ<ruby><rb>越</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>すことにしたんですよ。</span>／<span class="translation">I’ve decided to move to a detached house this time.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>いいですね。でも<ruby><rb>家賃</rb><rt>や ちん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>高</rb><rt>たか</rt></ruby>いんでしょう。ってことは、お<ruby><rb>給料</rb><rt>きゅう りょう</rt></ruby>、けっこうたくさんもらってるわけですね。</span>／<span class="translation">That’s good. But the rent must be high. So that means you must get a pretty high salary.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">A:</span>いや、それほどでもないですけどね。</span>／<span class="translation">No, not so much.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses the reason for or cause of what the other person says.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x106649"><span class="number">d. </span>...わけだ〈understanding〉</h3><h4 class="info">［だから...わけだ］</h4><h4 class="info">［それで...わけだ］</h4><h4 class="info">［なるほど...わけだ］</h4><h4 class="info">［どうりで...わけだ］</h4><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>山本</rb><rt>やま もと</rt></ruby>さん、<ruby><rb>結婚</rb><rt>けっ こん</rt></ruby>したらしいですよ。</span>／<span class="translation">It seems that Yamamoto-san has gotten married.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>ああ、そうだったんですか。それで<ruby><rb>最近</rb><rt>さい きん</rt></ruby>いつもきげんがいいわけだな。</span>／<span class="translation">Oh, is that so? So that’s why she’s always in a good mood lately.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>は3<ruby><rb>年</rb><rt>ねん</rt></ruby>もアフリカにフィールドワークに<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>っていたそうですよ。</span>／<span class="translation">I hear that she went to do fieldwork in Africa for three years.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>そうですか。<ruby><rb>道理</rb><rt>どう り</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>日本</rb><rt>に ほん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>状況</rb><rt>じょう きょう</rt></ruby>がよくわかっていないわけですね。</span>／<span class="translation">Really? It’s no wonder that she doesn’t know much about what’s going on in Japan.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>隣</rb><rt>となり</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>鈴木</rb><rt>すず き</rt></ruby>さん、<ruby><rb>退職</rb><rt>たい しょく</rt></ruby>したらしいよ。</span>／<span class="translation">It seems that Suzuki-san from next door has retired.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>そうか。だから<ruby><rb>平日</rb><rt>へい じつ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>昼間</rb><rt>ひる ま</rt></ruby>でも<ruby><rb>家</rb><rt>いえ</rt></ruby>にいるわけだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Oh. So that’s why he’s at home during the day even on weekdays.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>あ、<ruby><rb>鍵</rb><rt>かぎ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>違</rb><rt>ちが</rt></ruby>うじゃないか。なんだ。これじゃ、いくらがんばっても<ruby><rb>開</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>かないわけだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Oh! This must be the wrong key. What’s up with it? No wonder I couldn’t open it however much I tried.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>田中</rb><rt>た なか</rt></ruby>さん、<ruby><rb>一</rb><rt>いっ</rt></ruby>か<ruby><rb>月</rb><rt>げつ</rt></ruby>で4キロやせようと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>ってるんだって。なるほど、<ruby><rb>毎日</rb><rt>まい にち</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>昼</rb><rt>ひる</rt></ruby>ご<ruby><rb>飯</rb><rt>はん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>抜</rb><rt>ぬ</rt></ruby>いているわけだわ。</span>／<span class="translation">They say Tanaka-san is trying to lose four kilograms in one month. That’s why he’s skipping lunch every day.</span></div><div class="explanation">Often used in the form だから／それで／なるほど／どうりで...わけだ. Used in the form X。(だから)Yわけだdemonstrates that, although the speaker thought the reason for Y was mysterious, they have accepted that Y is so because of X after hearing information from another person which acts as the cause or reason.</div><div class="explanation">Since the speaker comes to <span class="noSeparate">his/her</span> own conclusion about the situation it is not necessary to use such phrases as ね afterwards but, in the polite form ...わけです, phrases such as ね and な are appended.</div><div class="explanation">In example (1), the situation is that Yamamoto-san has always been in a good mood lately but the reason for that is not known. It shows that, on hearing the information from A that “It seems Yamamoto-san has got married,” B comes to understand that as the reason for Yamamoto-san’s being in a good mood of late. The situation in (4) is that one person, speaking to <span class="noSeparate">him/her</span>self, does not understand why the door will not open and, discovering that he has the wrong key, comes to understand that as the reason for why the door will not open. As in (4) and (5), this is used by persons to detail something they have discovered for themselves or information they have heard from another. Combining that with facts already known, it is also used to show the speaker’s understanding of the situation.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x106755"><span class="number">3. </span>...わけだから</h2><h3 class="subsubtitle" id="idsubsubtitlex1x106758"><span class="number">a. </span>...わけだから...はとうぜんだ</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>小池</rb><rt>こ いけ</rt></ruby>さんは<ruby><rb>何年</rb><rt>なん ねん</rt></ruby>もインドネシア<ruby><rb>駐在員</rb><rt>ちゅう ざい いん</rt></ruby>だったわけだから、インドネシア<ruby><rb>語</rb><rt>ご</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はな</rt></ruby>せるのは<ruby><rb>当然</rb><rt>とう ぜん</rt></ruby>です。</span>／<span class="translation">As Koike-san was located in Indonesia for some years, he naturally can speak Indonesian.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>あの<ruby><rb>議員</rb><rt>ぎ いん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>履歴</rb><rt>り れき</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>偽</rb><rt>いつわ</rt></ruby>って<ruby><rb>国民</rb><rt>こく みん</rt></ruby>をだましていたわけだから、<ruby><rb>辞職</rb><rt>じ しょく</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>当然</rb><rt>とう ぜん</rt></ruby>のことだ。</span>／<span class="translation">As that member of the Diet lied about her background and deceived the people, it’s natural that she should resign.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><span class="number">A:</span>あの<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>、クビになったんだってよ。</span>／<span class="translation">I heard that person was fired.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span><ruby><rb>当然</rb><rt>とう ぜん</rt></ruby>よ。<ruby><rb>会社</rb><rt>かい しゃ</rt></ruby>のお<ruby><rb>金</rb><rt>かね</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>何百万</rb><rt>なん びゃく まん</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>使</rb><rt>つか</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>込</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>んでるのがばれたわけだから。</span>／<span class="translation">Of course. It’s because he was caught embezzling millions of the company’s money.</span></div><div class="explanation">In the form XわけだからYは当然だ, takes X, a reliable fact, as the foundation for asserting that, as X is a fact, Y is the natural outcome.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x106801"><span class="number">b. </span>...わけだから...てもとうぜんだ</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>大学</rb><rt>だい がく</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>てからもう8<ruby><rb>年</rb><rt>ねん</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>経</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>っているわけだから、<ruby><rb>結婚</rb><rt>けっ こん</rt></ruby>していても<ruby><rb>当然</rb><rt>とう ぜん</rt></ruby>だろう。</span>／<span class="translation">As it’s already been eight years since she left university, she’s probably married by now.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>大学</rb><rt>だい がく</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>卒業</rb><rt>そつ ぎょう</rt></ruby>しているわけだからパソコンが<ruby><rb>使</rb><rt>つか</rt></ruby>えても<ruby><rb>当然</rb><rt>とう ぜん</rt></ruby>なのに、まったく<ruby><rb>使</rb><rt>つか</rt></ruby>えないらしい。</span>／<span class="translation">As he graduated from university, you would think he would be able to use a computer, but it seems he can’t use one at all.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>これだけ<ruby><rb>利用者</rb><rt>り よう しゃ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>増</rb><rt>ふ</rt></ruby>えているわけだからもっと<ruby><rb>安</rb><rt>やす</rt></ruby>くしても<ruby><rb>当然</rb><rt>とう ぜん</rt></ruby>なのに、<ruby><rb>電車</rb><rt>でん しゃ</rt></ruby>やバスの<ruby><rb>運賃</rb><rt>うん ちん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>値上</rb><rt>ね あ</rt></ruby>がりする<ruby><rb>一方</rb><rt>いっ ぽう</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">Because the number of users is increasing, bus and train fares should get cheaper, but they just keep rising. </span></div><div class="explanation">Takes the form XわけだからYても当然だ. Means “when one accepts X as a reliable fact, it would not be strange if Y were also true.” As in examples (2) and (3), it is often used in cases where, in reality, the opposite situation to Y has occurred and runs counter to expectations.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x106832"><span class="number">4. </span>というわけだ／ってわけだ</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>イギリスとは<ruby><rb>時差</rb><rt>じ さ</rt></ruby>が8<ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby>あるから、<ruby><rb>日本</rb><rt>に ほん</rt></ruby>が 11 <ruby><rb>時</rb><rt>じ</rt></ruby>ならイギリスは3<ruby><rb>時</rb><rt>じ</rt></ruby>（だ）というわけだ。</span>／<span class="translation">As there is an eight hour time difference with the United Kingdom, when it is eleven o’clock in Japan, that means it is three o’clock in the United Kingdom. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>父親</rb><rt>ちち おや</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>母</rb><rt>はは</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>弟</rb><rt>おとうと</rt></ruby>だ。つまり<ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>はいとこ<ruby><rb>同士</rb><rt>どう し</rt></ruby>（だ）というわけだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Her father is my mother’s younger brother. In other words, that means we are cousins.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><span class="number">A:</span>あしたから<ruby><rb>温泉</rb><rt>おん せん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>くんだ。</span>／<span class="translation">I’m going to a hot spring from tomorrow.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>へえ、いいね。じゃ、<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>のことを<ruby><rb>忘</rb><rt>わす</rt></ruby>れて<ruby><rb>命</rb><rt>いのち</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>洗濯</rb><rt>せん たく</rt></ruby>ができるというわけだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Wow, that’s great. It means you can kick back and forget all about work.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>川本</rb><rt>かわ もと</rt></ruby>さん、<ruby><rb>車</rb><rt>くるま</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>いかえたらしいよ。</span>／<span class="translation">It seems that Kawamoto-san has changed his car.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>あ、そう。<ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>生</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>まれて<ruby><rb>前</rb><rt>まえ</rt></ruby>のが<ruby><rb>小</rb><rt>ちい</rt></ruby>さくなったってわけか。</span>／<span class="translation">Oh, really? Had the previous one gotten too small after his child was born?</span></div><div class="explanation">This form is related to the〈conclusion〉,〈restatement〉and〈reason〉uses of Usage 1 and 2 in わけだ.</div></body></html>