<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>なおす</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0666.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【なお】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0668.xhtml">【なか】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x61716">【なおす】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x61721"><span class="number">1. </span>R-なおす〈volitional〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>出版</rb><rt>しゅっ ぱん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>際</rb><rt>さい</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>論文</rb><rt>ろん ぶん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>一部</rb><rt>いち ぶ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>書</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>直</rb><rt>なお</rt></ruby>した。</span>／<span class="translation">I rewrote part of my thesis when I published it.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>俳優</rb><rt>はい ゆう</rt></ruby>がセリフを<ruby><rb>間違</rb><rt>ま ちが</rt></ruby>えたため、<ruby><rb>同</rb><rt>おな</rt></ruby>じ<ruby><rb>場面</rb><rt>ば めん</rt></ruby>を3<ruby><rb>度</rb><rt>ど</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>撮</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>り<ruby><rb>直</rb><rt>なお</rt></ruby>さなければならなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">Since the actor bungled his lines, we had to re-shoot the same scene three times over.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>答案</rb><rt>とう あん</rt></ruby>をもう<ruby><rb>一度</rb><rt>いち ど</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>見直</rb><rt>み なお</rt></ruby>してください。</span>／<span class="translation">Please check your answers one more time.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>顔</rb><rt>かお</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>洗</rb><rt>あら</rt></ruby>って<ruby><rb>出直</rb><rt>で なお</rt></ruby>して<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>い。</span>／<span class="translation">Don’t come back till you’ve sorted yourself out. (lit. “Wash your face before you come back.”)</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>一度</rb><rt>いち ど</rt></ruby>はこの<ruby><rb>大学</rb><rt>だい がく</rt></ruby>をやめようと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>ったが、<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>直</rb><rt>なお</rt></ruby>して<ruby><rb>卒業</rb><rt>そつ ぎょう</rt></ruby>まで<ruby><rb>頑張</rb><rt>がん ば</rt></ruby>ることにした。</span>／<span class="translation">I was once tempted to leave this university, but then I thought better of it and decided to hang on till graduation.</span></div><div class="explanation">When attached to the stem of a verb expressing an intentional action, なおす means to repeat an action that was done before. It is often used when the result of the previous action is considered unfavorable and the action is repeated in order to correct the original result. Except for a few cases such as 出る (leave/go out), なおす usually attaches to transitive verbs. Other examples include 言い直す (correct oneself/restate), 考え直す (think over/reconsider), し直す (do over again/try again), 立て直す (restore/rearrange),　建て直す (rebuild),　作り直す (reconstruct/remake),　練り直す (rework/revise), 飲み直す (go somewhere else for another round of drinks),　焼き直す (reheat/rework), and やり直す (do again/start over again).</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x61767"><span class="number">2. </span>R-なおす〈non-volitional〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>今年</rb><rt>ことし</rt></ruby>になって<ruby><rb>景気</rb><rt>けい き</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>持</rb><rt>も</rt></ruby>ち<ruby><rb>直</rb><rt>なお</rt></ruby>した。</span>／<span class="translation">The economy has rebounded since the beginning of this year.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>病人</rb><rt>びょう にん</rt></ruby>はだいぶ<ruby><rb>持</rb><rt>も</rt></ruby>ち<ruby><rb>直</rb><rt>なお</rt></ruby>した。</span>／<span class="translation">The patient has recovered considerably.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>勇敢</rb><rt>ゆう かん</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>態度</rb><rt>たい ど</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>て<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>にほれ<ruby><rb>直</rb><rt>なお</rt></ruby>した。</span>／<span class="translation">I fell in love with him all over again when I saw his courageous attitude.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>部長</rb><rt>ぶ ちょう</rt></ruby>のことを<ruby><rb>見直</rb><rt>み なお</rt></ruby>した。</span>／<span class="translation">I have come to think better of our department head.</span></div><div class="explanation">When なおす is attached to the stem of a non-volitional verb, which refers to a situation or state of affairs that does not involve any intentional action on the part of a person, it expresses the meaning of a spontaneous change for the better. For example, 持ち直す means that the economy (1) or a patient’s condition (2) improves. (3) and (4) mean that someone has newly recognized someone else’s merits and reassessed <span class="noSeparate">his/her</span> overall value. A limited range of verbs can combine with なおす for this usage, including those in the examples above and also 気を取り直す (take heart/pull oneself together). This usage of なおす is different from Usage 1 (above) in that there is no intention on the part of the subject to amend or redo something.</div></body></html>