<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>なんとか</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0731.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【なんという】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0733.xhtml">【なんとかいう】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x68736">【なんとか】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x68741"><span class="number">1. </span>なんとか〈volitional〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>なんとかして<ruby><rb>山田</rb><rt>やま だ</rt></ruby>さんを<ruby><rb>助</rb><rt>たす</rt></ruby>け<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>だ</rt></ruby>そう。</span>／<span class="translation">Let’s save Yamada-san somehow.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>このゴミの<ruby><rb>山</rb><rt>やま</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>早</rb><rt>はや</rt></ruby>くなんとかしないといけない。</span>／<span class="translation">We must somehow get rid of this pile of garbage soon.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>早</rb><rt>はや</rt></ruby>くなんとか<ruby><rb>手</rb><rt>て</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>打</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>たないと、<ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>たい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>変</rb><rt>へん</rt></ruby>なことになりますよ。</span>／<span class="translation">If we don’t do something immediately, the situation will get out of hand.  </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>お<ruby><rb>忙</rb><rt>いそが</rt></ruby>しいことは<ruby><rb>承知</rb><rt>しょう ち</rt></ruby>していますが、<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>とか<ruby><rb>明日</rb><rt>あ す</rt></ruby>までに<ruby><rb>仕上</rb><rt>し あ</rt></ruby>げていただけないでしょうか。</span>／<span class="translation">Although I understand that you are busy, could you possibly manage to finish this by tomorrow?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><span class="number">A:</span>あしたまでに<ruby><rb>仕上</rb><rt>し あ</rt></ruby>げるのはちょっと<ruby><rb>無理</rb><rt>む り</rt></ruby>ですね。</span>／<span class="translation">It’s impossible for me to get it done by tomorrow.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>そこを<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>とかできないでしょうか。<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>とかお<ruby><rb>願</rb><rt>ねが</rt></ruby>いしますよ。</span>／<span class="translation">Couldn’t you manage to do that somehow? I’d really appreciate it. </span></div><div class="explanation">Followed by a verb with the meaning of trying all possible means to do something, such as なんとかする or なんとか手を打つ, expresses the meaning of “taking a certain action for something.”</div><div class="explanation">In the expression なんとかして...する／しよう, as in (1), expresses the meaning of finding a way out of some difficult situation by taking an action. When followed by some expression of request, as shown in (4) and (5), implies the speaker’s request to be asking too much of the listener although the speaker understands the listener’s difficult situation. </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x68808"><span class="number">2. </span>なんとか〈barely manage (to do something)〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>安月給</rb><rt>やす げっ きゅう</rt></ruby>だがなんとか<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べていくことはできる。</span>／<span class="translation">Despite my low salary, I can just eke out a living.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>みなさんのご<ruby><rb>支援</rb><rt>し えん</rt></ruby>でなんとかここまで<ruby><rb>頑張</rb><rt>がん ば</rt></ruby>ってやって<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>れました。</span>／<span class="translation">Thanks to all your support, I have managed to make it to this point.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>銀行</rb><rt>ぎん こう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>金</rb><rt>かね</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>貸</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>してくれると<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>うから、<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>とか<ruby><rb>倒産</rb><rt>とう さん</rt></ruby>だけはまぬがれることができそうだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Since the bank told me that they would lend me money, it seems that I will somehow manage to at least avoid bankruptcy.</span></div><div class="explanation">Followed by an expression with some potential form, expresses the meaning that one can somehow manage to do something despite a difficulty or insufficiency. See やっと (Usage 2) for differences between なんとか, どうにか, and やっと.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x68839"><span class="number">3. </span>なんとかなる</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>そんなに<ruby><rb>心配</rb><rt>しん ぱい</rt></ruby>しなくてもなんとかなりますよ。</span>／<span class="translation">Don’t worry, it will all work out somehow.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>二階</rb><rt>に かい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>雨漏</rb><rt>あま も</rt></ruby>り、<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>とかならないかしら。</span>／<span class="translation">Can’t we do anything about the leaky roof on the second floor?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>これだけ<ruby><rb>蓄</rb><rt>たくわ</rt></ruby>えがあれば<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>とかなるだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">I guess we can get by on this much savings. </span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses the meaning that one can change an unfavorable situation to a favorable one, or one can manage to make do although something is insufficient. </div></body></html>