<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>というより</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0529.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【というものではない】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0531.xhtml">【といえど】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x50012">【というより】</h1><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>野村</rb><rt>の むら</rt></ruby>さんは、<ruby><rb>学校</rb><rt>がっ こう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>先生</rb><rt>せん せい</rt></ruby>というより、<ruby><rb>銀行員</rb><rt>ぎん こう いん</rt></ruby>のようだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Apparently Nomura-san is more a bank clerk than a school teacher.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>この<ruby><rb>絵本</rb><rt>え ほん</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>子供向</rb><rt>こ ども む</rt></ruby>けというより、むしろ、<ruby><rb>大人</rb><rt>おとな</rt></ruby>のために<ruby><rb>書</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>かれたような<ruby><rb>作品</rb><rt>さく ひん</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">I would say that this picture book is written not so much for children as for adults.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>あの<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>失礼</rb><rt>しつ れい</rt></ruby>というより、<ruby><rb>無神経</rb><rt>む しん けい</rt></ruby>なのだ。</span>／<span class="translation">That person is more insensitive than rude.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>論争</rb><rt>ろん そう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>静</rb><rt>しず</rt></ruby>めるためというより、<ruby><rb>自分</rb><rt>じ ぶん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>力</rb><rt>ちから</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>せつけるために<ruby><rb>発言</rb><rt>はつ げん</rt></ruby>したにすぎない。</span>／<span class="translation">He spoke up merely to show off his own power, rather than to defuse the argument.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to compare two ways of expressing or evaluating something. Means “it’s possible to say X, but in comparison to X, statement Y is more fitting.”</div></body></html>