<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>あんまり</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0027.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【あれでも】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0029.xhtml">【いい】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x2103">【あんまり】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x2105"><span class="number">1. </span>あんまり...ない</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>このごろはあんまり<ruby><rb>映画</rb><rt>えい が</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>ていない。</span>／<span class="translation">I haven’t seen a lot of movies recently.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>今日</rb><rt>きょう</rt></ruby>はあんまりお<ruby><rb>金</rb><rt>かね</rt></ruby>がないのでCDを<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>うのは<ruby><rb>今度</rb><rt>こん ど</rt></ruby>にしよう。</span>／<span class="translation">I don’t have enough money today, so I’ll buy a CD next time.</span></div><div class="explanation">An emphatic way to say あまり. It is typical of spoken language.  </div><h4 class="reference">→<a href="part0022.xhtml#idsubtitlex1x1438">【あまり】2</a></h4><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x2135"><span class="number">2. </span>あんまり</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>あんまりおかしくて<ruby><rb>涙</rb><rt>なみだ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>た。</span>／<span class="translation">It was so funny that tears came to my eyes. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>あんまり<ruby><rb>暑</rb><rt>あつ</rt></ruby>いと<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なに</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>考</rb><rt>かんが</rt></ruby>えられなくなる。</span>／<span class="translation">I can’t think about anything when it is too hot.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>英語</rb><rt>えい ご</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>下手</rb><rt>へ た</rt></ruby>だと<ruby><rb>馬鹿</rb><rt>ば か</rt></ruby>にされるが、あんまり<ruby><rb>上手</rb><rt>じょう ず</rt></ruby>だとかえって<ruby><rb>嫌</rb><rt>いや</rt></ruby>がられる。ほどほどにできるのがいいようだ。</span>／<span class="translation">People make fun of you if your English is bad, but on the other hand, if it’s too good, then they don’t like you. It seems best if you are just somewhat fluent.</span></div><div class="explanation">An emphatic way to say あまり. It is typical of spoken language.</div><h4 class="reference">→<a href="part0022.xhtml#idsubsubtitlex1x1441">【あまり】2a</a>、<a href="part0022.xhtml#idsubsubtitlex1x1542">【あまり】2c</a></h4><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x2176"><span class="number">3. </span>...なんてあんまりだ</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>誰</rb><rt>だれ</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>のことを<ruby><rb>覚</rb><rt>おぼ</rt></ruby>えていてくれなかったなんて、あんまりだ。</span>／<span class="translation">How upsetting that nobody remembered me!</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>君</rb><rt>きみ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>明日</rb><rt>あ す</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>補欠</rb><rt>ほ けつ</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">You are a substitute player, starting tomorrow.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>ええっ、<ruby><rb>監督</rb><rt>かん とく</rt></ruby>、それはあんまりですよ。もう<ruby><rb>一度</rb><rt>いち ど</rt></ruby>チャンスをいただけませんか。</span>／<span class="translation">What? That’s too much, coach. Please give me one more chance.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><span class="number">A:</span>あの<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なに</rt></ruby>をやらせてもミスが<ruby><rb>多</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>いのよね。この<ruby><rb>間</rb><rt>あいだ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>大事</rb><rt>だい じ</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>書類</rb><rt>しょ るい</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>電車</rb><rt>でん しゃ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>置</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>忘</rb><rt>わす</rt></ruby>れるし。あの<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>辞</rb><rt>や</rt></ruby>めてくれれば、もっと<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>でもスムーズにいくのに。</span>／<span class="translation">She makes so many mistakes in everything I have her do. Last time, she left some important documents on the train. If she quit her job, everything would go much smoother.  </span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>そういう<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>かた</rt></ruby>ってあんまりじゃない。<ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>まだ<ruby><rb>経験</rb><rt>けい けん</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>浅</rb><rt>あさ</rt></ruby>いんだし、その<ruby><rb>割</rb><rt>わり</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>頑張</rb><rt>がん ば</rt></ruby>ってるじゃない。</span>／<span class="translation">Isn’t that kind of harsh? She is still inexperienced, but she looks like she’s trying hard. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>ある<ruby><rb>日</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>突然</rb><rt>とつ ぜん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>解雇</rb><rt>かい こ</rt></ruby>するなんて、あんまりと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>えばあんまりだが、<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>にもそうされるだけの<ruby><rb>理由</rb><rt>り ゆう</rt></ruby>があるのだ。</span>／<span class="translation">You could say it’s too much to fire him so suddenly, but there is reason enough for him to be fired.   </span></div><div class="explanation">In some cases, って, は, or とは can be used withあんまりだ instead of なんて. Refers to a preceding statement and expresses a strong protest with the sense of “That’s terrible.” あんまりといえばあんまりだ, in (4), is an idiom.</div></body></html>