<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>および</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0103.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【おもったら】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0105.xhtml">【おり】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x9174">【および】</h1><h4 class="info">［NおよびN］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>会議</rb><rt>かい ぎ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>終了</rb><rt>しゅう りょう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>後</rb><rt>ご</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>名札</rb><rt>な ふだ</rt></ruby>およびアンケート<ruby><rb>用紙</rb><rt>よう し</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>回収</rb><rt>かい しゅう</rt></ruby>します。</span>／<span class="translation">After the meeting is over, name tags and questionnaires will be collected.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>この<ruby><rb>近辺</rb><rt>きん ぺん</rt></ruby>ではとなりの<ruby><rb>児童</rb><rt>じ どう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>公園</rb><rt>こう えん</rt></ruby>および<ruby><rb>小学校</rb><rt>しょう がっ こう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>運動場</rb><rt>うん どう じょう</rt></ruby>が、<ruby><rb>災害</rb><rt>さい がい</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>発生</rb><rt>はっ せい</rt></ruby>した<ruby><rb>場合</rb><rt>ば あい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>避難</rb><rt>ひ なん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>場所</rb><rt>ば しょ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>指定</rb><rt>し てい</rt></ruby>されている。</span>／<span class="translation">In this neighborhood, the children’s park next door and the sports field at the elementary school have been designated as evacuation sites for when disaster strikes.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>お<ruby><rb>祭</rb><rt>まつ</rt></ruby>りの<ruby><rb>前日</rb><rt>ぜん じつ</rt></ruby>および<ruby><rb>前</rb><rt>ぜん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>前日</rb><rt>ぜん じつ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>準備</rb><rt>じゅん び</rt></ruby>のため<ruby><rb>休業</rb><rt>きゅう ぎょう</rt></ruby>させていただきます。</span>／<span class="translation">This shop will be closed on the day before the festival as well as the day before that, in order to get ready.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>近隣</rb><rt>きんりん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>住民</rb><rt>じゅう みん</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>苦情</rb><rt>く じょう</rt></ruby>のあったマンション<ruby><rb>内</rb><rt>ない</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>騒音</rb><rt>そう おん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>及</rb><rt>およ</rt></ruby>びペットの<ruby><rb>問題</rb><rt>もん だい</rt></ruby>が、<ruby><rb>次回</rb><rt>じ かい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>組合</rb><rt>くみ あい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>総会</rb><rt>そうかい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>議題</rb><rt>ぎ だい</rt></ruby>となった。</span>／<span class="translation">The agenda for the next association meeting includes an item on complaints from the neighbors about noise in the apartment block and problems with pets.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>試験</rb><rt>し けん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>日程</rb><rt>にっ てい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>及</rb><rt>およ</rt></ruby>びレポートの<ruby><rb>提出</rb><rt>てい しゅつ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>期限</rb><rt>き げん</rt></ruby>については、<ruby><rb>追</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>って<ruby><rb>掲示</rb><rt>けい じ</rt></ruby>します。</span>／<span class="translation">The exam schedule and the submission deadline for papers will be posted at a later date.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to indicate a set or series of similar things. A written-language expression that means the same as NとN.</div></body></html>