<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>まい</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0934.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ほとんど】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0936.xhtml">【まえ】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x88259">【まい】</h1><div class="explanation">Structurally, まい is placed after a Group 1 verb in dictionary form, or a Group 2 verb in either verb stem or dictionary form. As for the Group 3 verbs 来る and する, there are two possibilities each of くるまい／こまい and するまい／すまい, respectively. Of the two, くるまい and するまい are more common in both verbs.</div><div class="explanation">When used with non-verbs, ない becomes あるまい, Nではない becomes Nではあるまい, Naではない  becomes Na ではあるまい, and A-くない becomes A-くあるまい.</div><div class="explanation">Can also be attached to ます to form ますまい.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x88291"><span class="number">1. </span>...まい</h2><h3 class="subsubtitle" id="idsubsubtitlex1x88297"><span class="number">a. </span>V-まい〈volition〉</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>酒</rb><rt>さけ</rt></ruby>はもう<ruby><rb>二度</rb><rt>に ど</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>飲</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>むまい。</span>／<span class="translation">I shall not drink <i>sake</i> ever again.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>あいつにはもう<ruby><rb>二度</rb><rt>に ど</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>会</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>うまい。</span>／<span class="translation">I shall not see her ever again.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>佐々木</rb><rt>さ さ き</rt></ruby>とけんかしたんだって？</span>／<span class="translation">Is it true that you quarreled with Sasaki?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>そうなんだよ。<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>親切</rb><rt>しん せつ</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ってるのに<ruby><rb>聞</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>こうともしないんだ。あいつにはもう<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なに</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>うまいと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>っているんだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Yes. He wouldn’t listen to me when I was advising him out of kindness. I have made up my mind that I won’t say anything to him anymore.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>二日</rb><rt>ふつか</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>酔</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>いの<ruby><rb>間</rb><rt>あいだ</rt></ruby>はもう<ruby><rb>二度</rb><rt>に ど</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>飲</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>みすぎるまいと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>うが、ついまた<ruby><rb>飲</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>み<ruby><rb>過</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>ぎてしまう。</span>／<span class="translation">When I have a hangover I always think that I won’t drink too much ever again, but then I can’t help indulging myself in drinking again.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>その<ruby><rb>時</rb><rt>とき</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>広子</rb><rt>ひろ こ</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>二度</rb><rt>に ど</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>田中</rb><rt>た なか</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>会</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>うまいと<ruby><rb>固</rb><rt>かた</rt></ruby>く<ruby><rb>決心</rb><rt>けっ しん</rt></ruby>した。</span>／<span class="translation">Just then, Hiroko firmly made up her mind that she would not see Tanaka ever again.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>母</rb><rt>はは</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>悲</rb><rt>かな</rt></ruby>しませまいと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>ってそのことは<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>らせずにおいた。</span>／<span class="translation">I kept it secret from my mother so as not to upset her.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses the speaker’s intention of not doing something. In spoken language, V-ないようにしよう and V-ないつもりだ are commonly used. To express someone else’s intention, as in the case of example (5), ...まいと決心する／思う／考える are used. Example (6) is in a formal style often found in written language, and it means that the speaker does not want to make his mother upset.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x88361"><span class="number">b. </span>V-まいとする</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>銃</rb><rt>じゅう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>奪</rb><rt>うば</rt></ruby>われまいとして<ruby><rb>争</rb><rt>あらそ</rt></ruby>いになった。</span>／<span class="translation">It developed into a fight as both sides tried to keep the gun from being taken by the other.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>夏子</rb><rt>なつ こ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>泣</rb><rt>な</rt></ruby>くまいとして<ruby><rb>歯</rb><rt>は</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>いしばった。</span>／<span class="translation">Natsuko clenched her teeth to keep herself from crying.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>家族</rb><rt>か ぞく</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>者</rb><rt>もの</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>心配</rb><rt>しん ぱい</rt></ruby>させまいとする<ruby><rb>気持</rb><rt>き も</rt></ruby>ちから、<ruby><rb>会社</rb><rt>かい しゃ</rt></ruby>をやめたことは<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>わずにおいた。</span>／<span class="translation">From my desire not to worry my family, I said nothing about the fact that I had left my company.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “trying not to do something.” A formal expression often found in writing. When it is used in the form of ...まいとして, して is sometimes omitted.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>銃を奪われまいと争いになった。／It developed into a fight as both sides tried to keep the gun from being taken by the other.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x88404"><span class="number">2. </span>...まい〈supposition, conjecture〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>このうれしさは<ruby><rb>他人</rb><rt>た にん</rt></ruby>にはわかるまい。</span>／<span class="translation">I don’t suppose anyone else could understand how happy I feel now.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>税金</rb><rt>ぜい きん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>減</rb><rt>へ</rt></ruby>らすのに<ruby><rb>反対</rb><rt>はん たい</rt></ruby>する<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>はまずあるまい。</span>／<span class="translation">I don’t suppose there is anyone who opposes a decrease in taxation.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>山田</rb><rt>やま だ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>氏</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>当選</rb><rt>とう せん</rt></ruby>はまず<ruby><rb>間違</rb><rt>ま ちが</rt></ruby>いあるまい。</span>／<span class="translation">There’s no mistaking that Yamada-shi (Mr. Yamada) will win the election.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>年老</rb><rt>とし お</rt></ruby>いた<ruby><rb>両親</rb><rt>りょう しん</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>亡</rb><rt>な</rt></ruby>くなって、ふるさとにはもうだれもいなくなってしまった。もう<ruby><rb>二度</rb><rt>に ど</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>訪</rb><rt>おとず</rt></ruby>れることもあるまい。</span>／<span class="translation">Now that both my elderly parents have died, there is nobody waiting for me in my hometown. I don’t think I will be visiting it again.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>こんな<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はなし</rt></ruby>をしてもだれも<ruby><rb>信</rb><rt>しん</rt></ruby>じてはくれまいと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>って、<ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>まで<ruby><rb>黙</rb><rt>だま</rt></ruby>っていたのです。</span>／<span class="translation">Because I thought no one would believe me even if I tried to explain, I haven’t told anyone about this until now.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>顔</rb><rt>かお</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>るだけで<ruby><rb>他人</rb><rt>た にん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>過去</rb><rt>か こ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>当</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>てるなんて<ruby><rb>妙</rb><rt>みょう</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はなし</rt></ruby>だが、これだけ<ruby><rb>証人</rb><rt>しょう にん</rt></ruby>がいるのならまんざら<ruby><rb>嘘</rb><rt>うそ</rt></ruby>でもあるまい。</span>／<span class="translation">Though it is very strange that anyone can tell someone else’s past by just looking at his or her face, with so many attesting to this fact, there could be some truth to it.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（7）</span><ruby><rb>他</rb><rt>ほか</rt></ruby>ならぬ<ruby><rb>松下</rb><rt>まつ した</rt></ruby>さんの<ruby><rb>御依頼</rb><rt>ご い らい</rt></ruby>ですから、<ruby><rb>父</rb><rt>ちち</rt></ruby>もまさかいやとは<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>いますまい。</span>／<span class="translation">Since it is a request from none other than Matsushita-san, I would never have thought that my father would refuse it.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（8）</span><ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>初</rb><rt>はじ</rt></ruby>めて<ruby><rb>下宿</rb><rt>げ しゅく</rt></ruby>した<ruby><rb>時</rb><rt>とき</rt></ruby>には、かぜをひいてはいまいか、<ruby><rb>一人</rb><rt>ひとり</rt></ruby>でさびしがっていはしまいかと<ruby><rb>心配</rb><rt>しん ぱい</rt></ruby>でならなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">When my child first started living in a boarding house, I was so worried over whether she might catch a cold or feel lonely.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means that someone will likely not do something. Expresses the speaker’s conjecture. Rarely used in spoken language, as in the case of example (7). 言わないだろう or 言わないでしょう is more common. However, it may be used in spoken language when it is used in quotations accompanying と思って or と考えて, as in example (5).</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x88465"><span class="number">3. </span>...でもあるまい</h2><h3 class="subsubtitle" id="idsubsubtitlex1x88468"><span class="number">a. </span>Nでもあるまい</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>紹介</rb><rt>しょう かい</rt></ruby>して<ruby><rb>下</rb><rt>くだ</rt></ruby>さる<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>もあるが、<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>ももう 70 だ。この<ruby><rb>歳</rb><rt>とし</rt></ruby>になって、いまさら<ruby><rb>会社勤</rb><rt>かい しゃ づと</rt></ruby>めでもあるまい。</span>／<span class="translation">Some people want to find work for me, but I am already seventy.  At this age, I can’t see starting to work for a company.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>自分</rb><rt>じ ぶん</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>家</rb><rt>いえ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>ておきながら、<ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>ごろになって、<ruby><rb>同居</rb><rt>どう きょ</rt></ruby>でもあるまい。</span>／<span class="translation">He left home on his own a long time ago, so at this point we can hardly expect him to live with his family again.</span></div><div class="explanation">Indicates that something or an action is not appropriate or befitting the situation. Often used in the form of いまさら／いまごろ、...でもあるまい, indicating that time has passed and it is no longer appropriate for a certain event to take place or to take a certain action.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x88493"><span class="number">b. </span>Nでもあるまいし</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>でもあるまいし、<ruby><rb>自分</rb><rt>じ ぶん</rt></ruby>のことは<ruby><rb>自分</rb><rt>じ ぶん</rt></ruby>でしなさい。</span>／<span class="translation">You are no longer a child, so take charge of your own things yourself.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>学生</rb><rt>がく せい</rt></ruby>でもあるまいし、アルバイトはやめて、きちんと<ruby><rb>勤</rb><rt>つと</rt></ruby>めなさい。</span>／<span class="translation">You are not a student, so stop working part-time and get a real job.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>17 や 18 の<ruby><rb>小娘</rb><rt>こ むすめ</rt></ruby>でもあるまいし、<ruby><rb>男</rb><rt>おとこ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>振</rb><rt>ふ</rt></ruby>られたぐらいで、いつまでもくよくよするのはやめなさい。</span>／<span class="translation">You are no longer a girl of seventeen or eighteen, so stop moping on and on just for being dumped by a guy.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “because something/someone is not N” or “because something/someone is not supposed to be N.” Often used in conjunction with a prohibitive or imperative form and is often used in scolding or criticizing someone. The form では／じゃあるまいし is also found.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x88524"><span class="number">c. </span>V-ることもあるまい</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>あんなにひどい<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>かた</rt></ruby>をすることもあるまいに。</span>／<span class="translation">There wasn’t any need for saying it so harshly, was there?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>あの<ruby><rb>程度</rb><rt>てい ど</rt></ruby>のことで、<ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>だい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>大人</rb><rt>おとな</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>泣</rb><rt>な</rt></ruby>くこともあるまい。</span>／<span class="translation">There is no need for a fully grown adult to cry over something so trivial as that. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>電話</rb><rt>でん わ</rt></ruby>か<ruby><rb>手紙</rb><rt>て がみ</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>用</rb><rt>よう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>足</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>りるのだから、わざわざ<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>くほどのこともあるまい。</span>／<span class="translation">Since the matter can be dealt with by telephone or letter, there is hardly any need for anyone to go there in person.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used in order to convey the opinion that a certain action is inappropriate or unnecessary. A formal expression often used in written language. In spoken language, V-ることもないだろう is used more often.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x88555"><span class="number">4. </span>まいか</h2><h3 class="subsubtitle" id="idsubsubtitlex1x88558"><span class="number">a. </span>...ではあるまいか</h3><h4 class="info">［N／Na　（なの）ではあるまいか］</h4><h4 class="info">［A／V　のではあるまいか］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>若</rb><rt>わか</rt></ruby>くみえるが、<ruby><rb>本当</rb><rt>ほん  とう</rt></ruby>はかなりの<ruby><rb>年輩</rb><rt>ねん ぱい</rt></ruby>なのではあるまいか。</span>／<span class="translation">Though he looks young, I wonder if he is in fact quite old.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>佐藤</rb><rt>さ とう</rt></ruby>さんは<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>らないふりをしているが、<ruby><rb>全部</rb><rt>ぜん ぶ</rt></ruby>わかっているのではあるまいか。</span>／<span class="translation">Though Sato-san is pretending not to know anything, she may in fact know everything.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>児童</rb><rt>じ どう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>自殺</rb><rt>じ さつ</rt></ruby>があいついだのには、<ruby><rb>現在</rb><rt>げん ざい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>教育</rb><rt>きょう いく</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>制度</rb><rt>せい ど</rt></ruby>に、<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なに</rt></ruby>か<ruby><rb>問題</rb><rt>もん だい</rt></ruby>があるのではあるまいか。</span>／<span class="translation">I wonder if there aren’t some problems in the current system of education that have caused this outbreak of children’s suicides.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>他人</rb><rt>た にん</rt></ruby>への<ruby><rb>無関心</rb><rt>む かん しん</rt></ruby>が、このような<ruby><rb>事件</rb><rt>じ けん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>引</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>起</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>こす<ruby><rb>一因</rb><rt>いち いん</rt></ruby>となったのではあるまいか。</span>／<span class="translation">Indifference towards other people may have been one of the factors that caused this incident.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>知識</rb><rt>ち しき</rt></ruby>のみを<ruby><rb>偏重</rb><rt>へん ちょう</rt></ruby>してきたことは、<ruby><rb>現在</rb><rt>げん ざい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>入試</rb><rt>にゅう し</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>制度</rb><rt>せい ど</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>きな<ruby><rb>欠陥</rb><rt>けっ かん</rt></ruby>ではあるまいか。</span>／<span class="translation">Putting too much emphasis on book-learning alone may be considered as a major defect in the current entrance examination system.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>会社</rb><rt>かい しゃ</rt></ruby>や<ruby><rb>組織</rb><rt>そ しき</rt></ruby>のためにのみ<ruby><rb>働</rb><rt>はたら</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>続</rb><rt>つづ</rt></ruby>ける<ruby><rb>生活</rb><rt>せい かつ</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>誰</rb><rt>だれ</rt></ruby>よりも<ruby><rb>本人</rb><rt>ほん にん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>一番</rb><rt>いち ばん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>苦</rb><rt>くる</rt></ruby>しいのではあるまいか。</span>／<span class="translation">For a life that is spent working continuously for a company or organization, it is the person <span class="noSeparate">him/her</span>self who probably suffers more than anyone else.</span></div><div class="explanation">Indicates the speaker’s conjecture ...ではないだろうか (I wonder if it isn’t a case of ...). </div><div class="explanation">When used in conjunction with a noun or <i>n</i><i>a</i>-adjective, takes either of the two forms: N/Naではあるまいか or N/Naなのではあるまいか.</div><div class="explanation">As in the cases (3) through (6), often used in introducing the discussion point or in presenting the speaker’s assertion by taking the form of a question to the listener. A formal expression used mainly in written language.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x88635"><span class="number">b. </span>V-てくれまいか</h3><h3 class="subsubtitle" id="idparagraphx1x88638"><span class="number"></span>V-てもらえまいか</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>忙</rb><rt>いそが</rt></ruby>しいからと<ruby><rb>一度</rb><rt>いち ど</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>断</rb><rt>こと</rt></ruby>わったのだが、なんとかやってもらえまいかと<ruby><rb>何度</rb><rt>なん ど</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>頼</rb><rt>たの</rt></ruby>まれてしかたなく<ruby><rb>引</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>受</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>けた。</span>／<span class="translation">I had refused to do it once by saying that I was too busy, but then I gave in and agreed to do it since I was begged so many times.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>例</rb><rt>れい</rt></ruby>のニューヨーク<ruby><rb>支店</rb><rt>し てん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>件</rb><rt>けん</rt></ruby>だが、<ruby><rb>支店長</rb><rt>し てん ちょう</rt></ruby>として、まず<ruby><rb>君</rb><rt>きみ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ってもらえまいか。</span>／<span class="translation">About the New York store... I wonder if you would go there first of all as the store manager.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>かしこまりました。</span>／<span class="translation">Yes, I will.</span></div><div class="explanation">Indicates a request. A masculine, formal expression. In spoken language, either V-てくれ or V-てもらえないだろうか is more common. As in (1), often used for quoting another person with the forms ...と頼まれた／言われた.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x88675"><span class="number">5. </span>V-ようがV-まいが<span class="reference">→<a href="part1024.xhtml#idsubsubtitlex1x101920">【よう<sub class="Subscript">2</sub>】4c</a></span></h2><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x88685"><span class="number">6. </span>V-ようとV-まいと<span class="reference">→<a href="part1024.xhtml#idsubsubtitlex1x102081">【よう<sub class="Subscript">2</sub>】6c</a></span></h2></body></html>