<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ときたら</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0568.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ときたひには】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0570.xhtml">【ときているから】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x53741">【ときたら】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x53743"><span class="number">1. </span>Nときたら</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>うちの<ruby><rb>亭主</rb><rt>てい しゅ</rt></ruby>ときたら、<ruby><rb>週</rb><rt>しゅう</rt></ruby>のうち3<ruby><rb>日</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>午前様</rb><rt>ご ぜん さま</rt></ruby>で、<ruby><rb>日曜</rb><rt>にち よう</rt></ruby>になるとごろごろ<ruby><rb>寝</rb><rt>ね</rt></ruby>てばかりいる。</span>／<span class="translation">That husband of mine—he’s out till after midnight at least three times a week, and then come Sunday, he just lies around the house!</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>あそこの<ruby><rb>家</rb><rt>いえ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>中</rb><rt>なか</rt></ruby>ときたら、<ruby><rb>散</rb><rt>ち</rt></ruby>らかし<ruby><rb>放題</rb><rt>ほう だい</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>足</rb><rt>あし</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>踏</rb><rt>ふ</rt></ruby>み<ruby><rb>場</rb><rt>ば</rt></ruby>もない。</span>／<span class="translation">You know that house over there? The inside is so cluttered that there's no place to stand!</span></div><div class="explanation">Used by the speaker to introduce a certain person or situation as the topic of conversation and then state an evaluation of that person/situation. The topic is someone or something that is well-known to the speaker, and <span class="noSeparate">s/he</span> uses ときたら to express a particularly strong emotion or evaluation that <span class="noSeparate">s/he</span> has regarding it. Usually followed by expressions that indicate criticism or dissatisfaction, such as 本当にいやになる (I really hate it) or あきれてしまう (I’m shocked). Used mostly in spoken language.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x53768"><span class="number">2. </span>...ときたら</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>毎日</rb><rt>まい にち</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>残業</rb><rt>ざん ぎょう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>後</rb><rt>あと</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>飲</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>み<ruby><rb>屋</rb><rt>や</rt></ruby>のはしごときたら、<ruby><rb>体</rb><rt>からだ</rt></ruby>がもつはずがない。</span>／<span class="translation">He works overtime every day and then goes bar-hopping, so there's no way his health could hold up.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>働</rb><rt>はたら</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>者</rb><rt>もの</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>気立</rb><rt>き だ</rt></ruby>てがいいときたら、みんなに<ruby><rb>好</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>かれるのも<ruby><rb>無理</rb><rt>む り</rt></ruby>はない。</span>／<span class="translation">She’s so hard-working and good-tempered—it's no wonder everyone likes her.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>新鮮</rb><rt>しん せん</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>刺</rb><rt>さ</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>身</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>ときたら、やっぱり<ruby><rb>辛口</rb><rt>から くち</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>日本酒</rb><rt>に ほん しゅ</rt></ruby>がいいな。</span>／<span class="translation">If there’s fresh <i>sashimi</i> (raw fish), I’ll go for—what else?—a dry Japanese<i> sake</i>.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>ステーキときたらやっぱり<ruby><rb>赤</rb><rt>あか</rt></ruby>ワインでなくちゃ。</span>／<span class="translation">When you’re having steak, you’ve got to have red wine! </span></div><div class="explanation">Used to introduce as the topic of conversation a person, thing, or situation with an extreme characteristic. Means “in this kind of case/situation, of course this is the only thing to do (or the only thing that will happen).” As shown in (3) and (4), this pattern also takes the form NときたらN, in which case it conveys the meaning that “N goes best with N” or “for N, N is the best.”</div></body></html>