<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>いったい</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0059.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【いっそ】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0061.xhtml">【いったらありはしない】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x5851">【いったい】</h1><h4 class="info">［いったい+疑問表現］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>いったい<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>生</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>きているのだろうか。</span>／<span class="translation">Is he even alive?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>祝日</rb><rt>しゅく じつ</rt></ruby>でもないのに、この<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>多</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>さはいったい<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>なのだ。</span>／<span class="translation">What in the world is this crowd, even though it’s not even a holiday?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>いったい<ruby><rb>全体</rb><rt>ぜん たい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なに</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>起</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>こったのか、さっぱり<ruby><rb>見当</rb><rt>けん とう</rt></ruby>がつかない。</span>／<span class="translation">What in heaven’s name happened? I have no idea at all.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>いったいあいつは<ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>ごろどこで<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なに</rt></ruby>をしているのだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">Where in the world is he and what is he doing now?</span></div><div class="explanation">いったい is used in interrogative expressions, and emphasizes the speaker’s feeling of bewilderment. いったい全体 is an even stronger expression. </div></body></html>