<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>てはだめだ</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0480.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【てはいられない】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0482.xhtml">【てはどうか】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x43394">【てはだめだ】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x43399"><span class="number">1. </span>V-てはだめだ〈prohibition〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>駐車場</rb><rt>ちゅう しゃ じょう</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>遊</rb><rt>あそ</rt></ruby>んではだめだ。<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>て<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>きなさい。</span>／<span class="translation">You can’t play in the parking lot. Please leave.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>「その<ruby><rb>花</rb><rt>はな</rt></ruby>をとってはだめよ。」と<ruby><rb>姉</rb><rt>あね</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>弟</rb><rt>おとうと</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>った。</span>／<span class="translation">“You mustn’t pick that flower,” she told her brother.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>文句</rb><rt>もん く</rt></ruby>ばかり<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>っていてはだめだ。<ruby><rb>自分</rb><rt>じ ぶん</rt></ruby>でなんとかしろ。</span>／<span class="translation">Don’t just complain. Do something on your own.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>こんなところでへばってはだめだ。あと1キロだ。しっかりしろ。</span>／<span class="translation">You can’t collapse at this point. There’s just one more kilometer to go. Pull yourself together!</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>「<ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>、あの<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>叱</rb><rt>しか</rt></ruby>ってはだめです。もうすこし<ruby><rb>様子</rb><rt>よう す</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>ましょう。」と<ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>部下</rb><rt>ぶ か</rt></ruby>をかばった。</span>／<span class="translation">“It won’t do to reprimand him now. Let’s wait a little longer and see what happens,” she said, coming to the defense of her subordinate.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span>そんな<ruby><rb>浅</rb><rt>あさ</rt></ruby>いところから、<ruby><rb>飛</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>び<ruby><rb>込</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>んではだめだ。</span>／<span class="translation">You must not dive from such a shallow place.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses prohibition. Often used by people in a supervisory position, such as teachers, parents, and managers, when they are speaking to someone being supervised. Often reduced from では to じゃ, or from ては to ちゃ. Same as V-てはいけない.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x43448"><span class="number">2. </span>...てはだめだ</h2><h4 class="info">［N／Na　ではだめだ］</h4><h4 class="info">［A-くてはだめだ］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-ていてはだめだ］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>写真</rb><rt>しゃ しん</rt></ruby>をとるのに、こんなに<ruby><rb>暗</rb><rt>くら</rt></ruby>くてはだめだ。</span>／<span class="translation">It’s too dark here for taking photos.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>秘書</rb><rt>ひ しょ</rt></ruby>になりたいそうだが、<ruby><rb>言葉</rb><rt>こと ば</rt></ruby>がそんなにぞんざいではだめだ。</span>／<span class="translation">She says she wants to be a secretary, but her rough way of speaking is a real problem.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>富士山</rb><rt>ふ じ さん</rt></ruby>へ<ruby><rb>登</rb><rt>のぼ</rt></ruby>りたいのなら、そんな<ruby><rb>靴</rb><rt>くつ</rt></ruby>ではだめです。<ruby><rb>登山靴</rb><rt>と ざん ぐつ</rt></ruby>をはきなさい。</span>／<span class="translation">If  you want to climb <i>Fuji-san</i><i> </i>(Mt. Fuji), those shoes are no good. Wear climbing boots.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>でもお<ruby><rb>母</rb><rt>かあ</rt></ruby>さんに<ruby><rb>洗濯</rb><rt>せん たく</rt></ruby>してもらっているんですか。それではだめです。<ruby><rb>自立</rb><rt>じ りつ</rt></ruby>したかったら、<ruby><rb>自分</rb><rt>じ ぶん</rt></ruby>でやりなさい。</span>／<span class="translation">Are you still having your mother do your wash? That’s no good! If you want to be independent, do it yourself.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>君</rb><rt>きみ</rt></ruby>のように<ruby><rb>遊</rb><rt>あそ</rt></ruby>んでばかりいてはだめだ。<ruby><rb>学生</rb><rt>がく せい</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>勉強</rb><rt>べん きょう</rt></ruby>しなくてはいけない。</span>／<span class="translation">You can’t just fool around and have fun all the time. Students have to study!</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses the judgment that under a certain condition, it will be impossible to attain a certain goal. The goal is sometimes expressed in words, and sometimes only alluded to in the context. Often used in conversation. The contracted forms じゃ（あ）だめだ and ちゃ（あ）だめだ are also used.</div><div class="explanation">As in (5), this form may also be combined with verbs to create the construction V-ていてはだめだ, which is used to state that the present situation is unacceptable and to criticize or reprimand someone.</div></body></html>