<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>たる</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0411.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【たりとも】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0413.xhtml">【たろう】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x34833">【たる】</h1><div class="explanation">Derived from the literary expression てあり. Gives a solemn impression. Has an exaggerated tone, and is used for extremely polite written language or formal spoken language such as in public speeches. </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x34845"><span class="number">1. </span>NたるN</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>国家</rb><rt>こっ か</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>指導者</rb><rt>し どう しゃ</rt></ruby>たる<ruby><rb>者</rb><rt>もの</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>緊急</rb><rt>きん きゅう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>際</rb><rt>さい</rt></ruby>にすばやい<ruby><rb>判断</rb><rt>はん だん</rt></ruby>ができなければならない。</span>／<span class="translation">The leader of a nation has to have the ability to make a quick decision in an emergency situation.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>国会議員</rb><rt>こっ かい ぎ いん</rt></ruby>たる<ruby><rb>者</rb><rt>もの</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>身辺</rb><rt>しんぺん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>潔白</rb><rt>けっぱく</rt></ruby>でなければならないはずである。</span>／<span class="translation">Someone who is a member of the Diet should be completely beyond reproach (lit. squeaky clean).</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>教師</rb><rt>きょう し</rt></ruby>たる<ruby><rb>者</rb><rt>もの</rt></ruby>は、すべてにおいて<ruby><rb>生徒</rb><rt>せい と</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>模範</rb><rt>も はん</rt></ruby>とならねばならないとここに<ruby><rb>書</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>いてある。</span>／<span class="translation">It says here that a person who is a teacher must be a model for students in every respect.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>百獣</rb><rt>ひゃく じゅう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>王</rb><rt>おう</rt></ruby>たるライオンをカメラにおさめたいとサファリに<ruby><rb>参加</rb><rt>さん か</rt></ruby>した。</span>／<span class="translation">He participated in a safari, saying he wanted to take pictures of a lion, the so-called king of beasts.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “something that has the (distinguished) qualification mentioned.”</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x34882"><span class="number">2. </span>NたるとNたるとをとわず</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>救出</rb><rt>きゅう しゅつ</rt></ruby>にあたっては<ruby><rb>軍人</rb><rt>ぐん じん</rt></ruby>たると<ruby><rb>民間人</rb><rt>みん かん じん</rt></ruby>たるとを<ruby><rb>問</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>わず、<ruby><rb>総力</rb><rt>そう りょく</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>結集</rb><rt>けっ しゅう</rt></ruby>せよ。</span>／<span class="translation">In rescue work, put all your effort into saving lives, regardless of whether you’re a soldier or a civilian.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>医療</rb><rt>い りょう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>活動</rb><rt>かつ どう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>民間人</rb><rt>みん かん じん</rt></ruby>たると、<ruby><rb>政府</rb><rt>せい ふ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>関係者</rb><rt>かんけいしゃ</rt></ruby>たるとを<ruby><rb>問</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>わず、<ruby><rb>全員</rb><rt>ぜん いん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>平等</rb><rt>びょう どう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>扱</rb><rt>あつか</rt></ruby>う。</span>／<span class="translation">Medical work treats everyone equally, regardless of whether they are ordinary citizens or government officials.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>この<ruby><rb>法律</rb><rt>ほう りつ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>市民</rb><rt>し みん</rt></ruby>たると<ruby><rb>外国人</rb><rt>がい こく じん</rt></ruby>たるとを<ruby><rb>問</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>わず<ruby><rb>等</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>しく<ruby><rb>適用</rb><rt>てき よう</rt></ruby>される。</span>／<span class="translation">This law applies equally to all, regardless of whether they are a citizen or a foreigner.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “regardless of whether it’s X or Y, both are....”</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x34913"><span class="number">3. </span>Nたるべきもの</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>それは、<ruby><rb>指導者</rb><rt>し どう しゃ</rt></ruby>たるべき<ruby><rb>者</rb><rt>もの</rt></ruby>のとる<ruby><rb>行動</rb><rt>こう どう</rt></ruby>ではない。</span>／<span class="translation">That’s not how a leader should behave.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>後継者</rb><rt>こう けい しゃ</rt></ruby>たるべき<ruby><rb>者</rb><rt>もの</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>以下</rb><rt>い か</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>資格</rb><rt>し かく</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>備</rb><rt>そな</rt></ruby>えていなければならない。</span>／<span class="translation">A successor should have the following qualifications.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>王</rb><rt>おう</rt></ruby>たるべき<ruby><rb>者</rb><rt>もの</rt></ruby>はそのようなことを<ruby><rb>恐</rb><rt>おそ</rt></ruby>れてはならない。</span>／<span class="translation">A king must not fear such a thing.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “a person who ought to have such qualification as...” or “someone who should have the position of....” The latter half of the sentence usually states “must naturally be...,” to describe the desired form of the person with the qualification or position described in the first half.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x34944"><span class="number">4. </span>Nたるや</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>そのショーの<ruby><rb>意外性</rb><rt>い がい せい</rt></ruby>たるや、すべての<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>注目</rb><rt>ちゅう もく</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>集</rb><rt>あつ</rt></ruby>めるに<ruby><rb>十分</rb><rt>じゅう ぶん</rt></ruby>であった。</span>／<span class="translation">The novelty of the show was enough to get the attention of everyone.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>その<ruby><rb>姿</rb><rt>すがた</rt></ruby>たるや、さながら<ruby><rb>鬼</rb><rt>おに</rt></ruby>のようであった。</span>／<span class="translation">The figure was almost like a devil.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>その<ruby><rb>歌声</rb><rt>うた ごえ</rt></ruby>たるや、<ruby><rb>聞</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>る<ruby><rb>聴衆</rb><rt>ちょう しゅう</rt></ruby>のすべてを<ruby><rb>感動</rb><rt>かん どう</rt></ruby>させるすばらしいものであった。</span>／<span class="translation">That voice was so wonderful that it impressed every audience.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>救出</rb><rt>きゅう しゅつ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>際</rb><rt>さい</rt></ruby>しての<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>らの<ruby><rb>活動</rb><rt>かつ どう</rt></ruby>たるや、<ruby><rb>長</rb><rt>なが</rt></ruby>く<ruby><rb>記憶</rb><rt>き おく</rt></ruby>にとどめるに<ruby><rb>十分</rb><rt>じゅう ぶん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>値</rb><rt>あたい</rt></ruby>するものであった。</span>／<span class="translation">Their activities in doing rescue work were certainly worth keeping in memory for a long time.</span></div><div class="explanation">Uses a noun which possesses a certain characteristic to emphasize what it expresses. Describes what property it has or what state it is in. Personal names are not used.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>山田先生たるや、すべての人を感動させた。／The way of Yamada-sensei impressed everyone.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>山田先生の話し振りたるや、すべての人を感動させた。／The way Yamada-sensei spoke impressed everyone.</div><div class="explanation">This is a type of expression for emphasis when introducing the subject of the sentence. In (1), for example, it is an exaggerated expression in comparison to only その意外性は....</div></body></html>