<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>やなんぞ</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part1017.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【やっと】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part1019.xhtml">【やむ】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x100759">【やなんぞ】</h1><h4 class="info">［Nやなんぞ］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>大学</rb><rt>だい がく</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>名前</rb><rt>な まえ</rt></ruby>やなんぞでぼくを<ruby><rb>評価</rb><rt>ひょう か</rt></ruby>してほしくない。</span>／<span class="translation">I don’t want to be judged on things like the name of my university.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>不況</rb><rt>ふ きょう</rt></ruby>やなんぞには<ruby><rb>負</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>けていられない。<ruby><rb>皆</rb><rt>みんな</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>会社</rb><rt>かい しゃ</rt></ruby>のためにがんばろう。</span>／<span class="translation">We cannot be defeated by things like a recession. Let’s all do our best for the company.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>塾</rb><rt>じゅく</rt></ruby>やなんぞに<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>っても、やる<ruby><rb>気</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>がなくちゃだめだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Even if you go to cram school or whatever, it’s no good if you have no motivation.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>たった<ruby><rb>一度</rb><rt>いち ど</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>受賞</rb><rt>じゅ しょう</rt></ruby>やなんぞで<ruby><rb>得意</rb><rt>とく い</rt></ruby>になってはいけないよ。</span>／<span class="translation">You really shouldn’t let getting an award once go to your head.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means ...やなにか but is used negatively. やなんか can also be used. A somewhat old-fashioned expression.</div></body></html>