<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ためし</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0403.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ため】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0405.xhtml">【たら<sub class="variation">1</sub>】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x32788">【ためし】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x32790"><span class="number">1. </span>ためしに...てみる</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>先月</rb><rt>せん げつ</rt></ruby>できたレストランはおいしいという<ruby><rb>評判</rb><rt>ひょう ばん</rt></ruby>だ。ためしに<ruby><rb>一度</rb><rt>いち ど</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ってみよう。</span>／<span class="translation">The restaurant that was opened last month is said to have good food. Let’s go and try it once.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>テレビで<ruby><rb>宣伝</rb><rt>せん でん</rt></ruby>していたシャンプー、ためしに<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>ってみましょう。</span>／<span class="translation">Let’s try out the shampoo they were advertising on TV.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>新発売</rb><rt>しん はつ ばい</rt></ruby>のインスタントラーメンためしに<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>ってみたがおいしくなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">I tried the newly marketed noodles, but they were not very good.</span></div><div class="explanation"> Means “try out; see if it is good or bad.”</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x32821"><span class="number">2. </span>V-たためしがない</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>約束</rb><rt>やく そく</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>守</rb><rt>まも</rt></ruby>ったためしがない。</span>／<span class="translation">She never sticks to the time she promised.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>競馬</rb><rt>けい ば</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>好</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>きだが、<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>予想</rb><rt>よ そう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>一度</rb><rt>いち ど</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>当</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>たったためしがない。</span>／<span class="translation">He likes horse-racing, but his predictions have never been right.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>とはよく<ruby><rb>食事</rb><rt>しょく じ</rt></ruby>をするが、おごってくれたためしがない。</span>／<span class="translation">I often have a meal with him, but he never treats me.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>息子</rb><rt>むすこ</rt></ruby>はあきっぽくて、<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なに</rt></ruby>をやっても<ruby><rb>三日</rb><rt>みっ か</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>続</rb><rt>つづ</rt></ruby>いたためしがない。</span>／<span class="translation">My son quickly tires of things and has never managed to continue something for more than three days.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “there has not been any occasion where....” Carries a feeling of blame or censure.</div></body></html>