<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>いうまでもない</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0030.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【いう】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0032.xhtml">【いか】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x3023">【いうまでもない】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x3025"><span class="number">1. </span>...はいうまでもない</h2><h4 class="info">［Nはいうまでもない］</h4><h4 class="info">［N　であるのはいうまでもない］</h4><h4 class="info">［Na　であるのはいうまでもない］</h4><h4 class="info">［Na　なのはいうまでもない］</h4><h4 class="info">［A／V　 のはいうまでもない］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>全然</rb><rt>ぜん ぜん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>学校</rb><rt>がっ こう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>なかった<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>卒業</rb><rt>そつ ぎょう</rt></ruby>できなかったのは<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>うまでもない。</span>／<span class="translation">For someone like him who never came to school, it goes without saying that he could not graduate.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>単位</rb><rt>たん い</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>足</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>りなければ<ruby><rb>卒業</rb><rt>そつ ぎょう</rt></ruby>できないのは<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>うまでもないが、<ruby><rb>足</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>りていても<ruby><rb>卒業</rb><rt>そつ ぎょう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>論文</rb><rt>ろん ぶん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>書</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>かなければ<ruby><rb>卒業</rb><rt>そつ ぎょう</rt></ruby>できない。</span>／<span class="translation">It goes without saying that one cannot graduate without enough credits, but even with enough credits, it’s impossible to graduate without writing a thesis.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>につけば<ruby><rb>収入</rb><rt>しゅう にゅう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>増</rb><rt>ふ</rt></ruby>えるが<ruby><rb>自由</rb><rt>じ ゆう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>少</rb><rt>すく</rt></ruby>なくなるというのは<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>うまでもないことだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Getting a job increases your income, but it goes without saying that your free time will decrease.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>上司</rb><rt>じょう し</rt></ruby>にも<ruby><rb>気</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>られ<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>成績</rb><rt>せい せき</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>伸</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>ばしている<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>次期</rb><rt>じき</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>昇進</rb><rt>しょう しん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>可能性</rb><rt>か のう せい</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>うまでもない。</span>／<span class="translation">He is well-liked by his boss and has really grown the business, so I hardly need to tell you that there’s a very good chance he’ll be promoted in the next quarter.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>今度</rb><rt>こん ど</rt></ruby>パリに<ruby><rb>出張</rb><rt>しゅっ ちょう</rt></ruby>だそうですよ。<ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>ならフランス<ruby><rb>語</rb><rt>ご</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>完</rb><rt>かん</rt></ruby>ぺきだし<ruby><rb>交渉</rb><rt>こう しょう</rt></ruby>もうまいし、<ruby><rb>適任</rb><rt>てき にん</rt></ruby>ですよね。</span>／<span class="translation">I heard she is going to Paris on business. With her absolute command of French and skill in negotiating, that’s the perfect assignment for her, you know.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>ええ、それはもう<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>うまでもないですよね。</span>／<span class="translation">Of course, that goes without saying.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses that the matter at hand is common sense, something obvious, or widely recognized.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x3090"><span class="number">2. </span>いうまでもないことだが</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>うまでもないことだが、ツアー<ruby><rb>旅行</rb><rt>りょ こう</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>勝手</rb><rt>かっ て</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>行動</rb><rt>こう どう</rt></ruby>をとって<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なに</rt></ruby>か<ruby><rb>問題</rb><rt>もん だい</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>起</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>こっても、それはその<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>自身</rb><rt>じ しん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>責任</rb><rt>せき にん</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">Needless to say, it’s the person’s own responsibility if some trouble arises on a tour because he or she acted on <span class="noSeparate">his/her</span> own.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>うまでもないことですが、この<ruby><rb>計画</rb><rt>けい かく</rt></ruby>はみなさんの<ruby><rb>御協力</rb><rt>ご きょう りょく</rt></ruby>があって<ruby><rb>初</rb><rt>はじ</rt></ruby>めて<ruby><rb>成功</rb><rt>せい こう</rt></ruby>するものです。</span>／<span class="translation">I hardly need to mention that this plan would never have succeeded without everyone's cooperation from the start.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>うまでもないことだけど、<ruby><rb>結婚</rb><rt>けっ こん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>披露宴</rb><rt>ひ ろう えん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>白</rb><rt>しろ</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>服</rb><rt>ふく</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>着</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>て<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ってはいけないんだよ。</span>／<span class="translation">Sorry, but it’s just a given that you shouldn't go to a wedding reception wearing white.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used at the beginning of a sentence, this means “although it is not necessary to say this because you already know it.” It is an idiomatic expression used to confirm something that should require no explanation. </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x3121"><span class="number">3. </span>いうまでもなく</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>うまでもなく、<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>たちをとりまく<ruby><rb>環境</rb><rt>かん きょう</rt></ruby>はどんどん<ruby><rb>汚染</rb><rt>お せん</rt></ruby>されてきている。</span>／<span class="translation">It is needless to say that our environment is getting more and more polluted.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>などが<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>うまでもなく、<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>芸術的</rb><rt>げい じゅつ てき</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>才能</rb><rt>さい のう</rt></ruby>はこれまでの<ruby><rb>画家</rb><rt>が か</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>不可能</rb><rt>ふ か のう</rt></ruby>だった<ruby><rb>新</rb><rt>あたら</rt></ruby>しいものを<ruby><rb>生</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>み<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>だ</rt></ruby>している。</span>／<span class="translation">I hardly need to tell you that his artistic talent has produced novel works that would previously have been impossible for artists.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>日本</rb><rt>に ほん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>高齢化</rb><rt>こう れい か</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>社会</rb><rt>しゃ かい</rt></ruby>になりつつあるが、<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>うまでもなく<ruby><rb>国</rb><rt>くに</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>対応</rb><rt>たい おう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>遅</rb><rt>おく</rt></ruby>れており、<ruby><rb>国民</rb><rt>こく みん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>不満</rb><rt>ふ まん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>感</rb><rt>かん</rt></ruby>じている。</span>／<span class="translation">Japan is becoming an aged society, but as you might expect, the government’s countermeasures are lagging behind and citizens are feeling dissatisfied.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used at the beginning of a sentence or clause, this means “although it is not necessary to say this because you already know it.” It is used before stating something obvious. It may be rephrased as 言うまでもないことだが when used at the beginning of a sentence.</div></body></html>