<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>てもさしつかえない</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0502.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【てもかまわない】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0504.xhtml">【てもしかたがない】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x46503">【てもさしつかえない】</h1><h4 class="info">［N／Na　でもさしつかえない］</h4><h4 class="info">［A-くてもさしつかえない］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-てもさしつかえない］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>無理</rb><rt>む り</rt></ruby>をしなければ<ruby><rb>運動</rb><rt>うん どう</rt></ruby>をしてもさしつかえありません。</span>／<span class="translation">If you don’t strain yourself, you may do some exercise.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>ひとりかふたりのお<ruby><rb>客</rb><rt>きゃく</rt></ruby>さまなら、<ruby><rb>人数</rb><rt>にん ずう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>変更</rb><rt>へん こう</rt></ruby>なさってもさしつかえありません。</span>／<span class="translation">There is no problem changing the number of guests, if it’s only one or two people.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>この<ruby><rb>書類</rb><rt>しょ るい</rt></ruby>ははんこがなくてもさしつかえない。</span>／<span class="translation">This document doesn’t need to have your seal.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>最終的</rb><rt>さい しゅう てき</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>決定</rb><rt>けっ てい</rt></ruby>するのに、<ruby><rb>全員</rb><rt>ぜん いん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>意見</rb><rt>い けん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>聞</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>けなくてもさしつかえはないと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>う。</span>／<span class="translation">I think it’s still all right to make the final decision, even if we can’t listen to everyone’s opinion.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used in the forms てもさしつかえない and なくてもさしつかえない. An expression of concession which means that the condition indicated by ても is acceptable or presents no difficulties. さしつかえはない is also used. Close in meaning to てもいい and てもかまわない, but usually used in more formal situations than these two.</div></body></html>