<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>をけいきとして</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part1069.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【をきんじえない】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part1071.xhtml">【をこめて】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x107671">【をけいきとして】</h1><h4 class="info">［Nをけいきとして］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>大学</rb><rt>だい がく</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>入学</rb><rt>にゅう がく</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>契機</rb><rt>けい き</rt></ruby>として<ruby><rb>親元</rb><rt>おや もと</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>た。</span>／<span class="translation">With entering university as her motivation, she left her parent’s home.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>就職</rb><rt>しゅう しょく</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>契機</rb><rt>けい き</rt></ruby>として<ruby><rb>生活</rb><rt>せい かつ</rt></ruby>スタイルを<ruby><rb>ガラリと</rb><rt>がらりと</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>変</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>えた。</span>／<span class="translation">He took finding a job as the opportunity to change his lifestyle.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>日本</rb><rt>に ほん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>敗戦</rb><rt>はい せん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>契機</rb><rt>けい き</rt></ruby>として<ruby><rb>国民</rb><rt>こく みん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>主権</rb><rt>しゅけん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>国家</rb><rt>こっ か</rt></ruby>へと<ruby><rb>転換</rb><rt>てん かん</rt></ruby>したと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>われている。</span>／<span class="translation">It is said that Japan converted to popular sovereignty as a result of being defeated in the war.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>今回</rb><rt>こん かい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>合併</rb><rt>がっ ぺい</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>契機</rb><rt>けい き</rt></ruby>として、<ruby><rb>我</rb><rt>わ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>社</rb><rt>しゃ</rt></ruby>は 21 <ruby><rb>世紀</rb><rt>せい き</rt></ruby>をリードする<ruby><rb>企業</rb><rt>き ぎょう</rt></ruby>としてさらに<ruby><rb>発展</rb><rt>はっ てん</rt></ruby>してゆかなければならない。</span>／<span class="translation">Taking advantage of this merger, our company must further develop and be a leader in the 21 century.</span></div><div class="explanation">Attaches to nouns demonstrating actions such as “enter university” and “find employment.” Means “with a particular event as the cue/as the turning point.” ...をけいきに and ...をけいきにして can also be said.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>彼女は大学入学を契機に（して）親元を出た。／With entering university as her motivation, she left her parent’s home.</div><div class="explanation">Written expression.</div></body></html>