<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>からして</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0158.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【からしたら】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0160.xhtml">【からする】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x13267">【からして】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x13272"><span class="number">1. </span>Nからして〈example〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>リーダーからしてやる<ruby><rb>気</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>がないのだから、ほかの<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>たちがやるはずがない。</span>／<span class="translation">If the leader doesn’t have motivation, you can’t expect other people to do anything.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>課長</rb><rt>か ちょう</rt></ruby>からして<ruby><rb>事態</rb><rt>じ たい</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>把握</rb><rt>は あく</rt></ruby>していないのだからヒラの<ruby><rb>社員</rb><rt>しゃ いん</rt></ruby>によくわからないのも<ruby><rb>無理</rb><rt>む り</rt></ruby>はない。</span>／<span class="translation">If the section chief doesn’t grasp the situation, it’s easy to guess that ordinary employees don’t understand what’s happening either.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>ほら、その<ruby><rb>君</rb><rt>きみ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>かた</rt></ruby>からして、<ruby><rb>外国人</rb><rt>がい こく じん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>対</rb><rt>たい</rt></ruby>する<ruby><rb>偏見</rb><rt>へん けん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>感</rb><rt>かん</rt></ruby>じられるよ。</span>／<span class="translation">Look, even the way you talk makes me feel your prejudice against people from other countries.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>君</rb><rt>きみ</rt></ruby>はいろいろ<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>うが、まずこの<ruby><rb>問題</rb><rt>もん だい</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>自分</rb><rt>じ ぶん</rt></ruby>はまったく<ruby><rb>責任</rb><rt>せき にん</rt></ruby>がないと<ruby><rb>信</rb><rt>しん</rt></ruby>じ<ruby><rb>込</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>んでいることからして<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>理解</rb><rt>り かい</rt></ruby>しかねる。</span>／<span class="translation">You say many things about this, but, in the first place, I can’t understand why you believe that you don’t have any responsibility at all.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to present an extreme or typical example and expresses the feeling that “if something is so, then of course other things will also be so.” Often used in negative evaluations. にしてからが can also be used. </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x13312"><span class="number">2. </span>Nからして〈basis〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>あの<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>かた</rt></ruby>からして、<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>はあの<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>にきらわれているようだ。</span>／<span class="translation">From the way he spoke, he really seems to dislike me.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>あの<ruby><rb>態度</rb><rt>たい ど</rt></ruby>からして、<ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>引</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>下</rb><rt>さ</rt></ruby>がる<ruby><rb>気</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>はまったくないようだ。</span>／<span class="translation">From her attitude, she doesn’t intend to back down at all.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>あの<ruby><rb>口</rb><rt>くち</rt></ruby>ぶりからして、<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>はもうその<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はなし</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>っているようだな。</span>／<span class="translation">Judging from the way he talks, he already seems to know about what was said.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>あの<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>性格</rb><rt>せい かく</rt></ruby>からして、そんなことで<ruby><rb>納得</rb><rt>なっ とく</rt></ruby>するはずがないよ。</span>／<span class="translation">Judging from her character, there’s no way she could be persuaded.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses a basis from which to make a judgment. からすると, からみて, からいって are also used to express a similar meaning.</div></body></html>