<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>もっぱら</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0991.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【もっとも】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0993.xhtml">【もと】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x97895">【もっぱら】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x97897"><span class="number">1. </span>もっぱら</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>世間</rb><rt>せ けん</rt></ruby>ではもっぱら<ruby><rb>消費税</rb><rt>しょう ひ ぜい</rt></ruby>のことでもちきりだ。</span>／<span class="translation">The consumption tax is the talk of the town.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>いろいろな<ruby><rb>酒類</rb><rt>さけ るい</rt></ruby>があったが、<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>はもっぱら<ruby><rb>日本酒</rb><rt>に ほん しゅ</rt></ruby>ばかり<ruby><rb>飲</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>んでいた。</span>／<span class="translation">There were various kinds of alcohol available, but he was only drinking <i>sake</i>.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>愛読書</rb><rt>あい どく しょ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>ですか。</span>／<span class="translation">What is your favorite book?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>はもっぱら<ruby><rb>推理</rb><rt>すい り</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>小説</rb><rt>しょう せつ</rt></ruby>です。</span>／<span class="translation">I am really into detective novels.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>日曜</rb><rt>にち よう</rt></ruby>はもっぱらテレビにゴロ<ruby><rb>寝</rb><rt>ね</rt></ruby>です。</span>／<span class="translation">Sunday is all about lying around in front of the television.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “just about only that” or “by and large.”</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x97949"><span class="number">2. </span>もっぱらのN</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>K<ruby><rb>監督</rb><rt>かん とく</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>新作</rb><rt>しん さく</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>面白</rb><rt>おも しろ</rt></ruby>いともっぱらの<ruby><rb>評判</rb><rt>ひょう ばん</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">People are saying that the latest movie from (Director) K is interesting. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>王子</rb><rt>おう じ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>花嫁</rb><rt>はなよめ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>候補</rb><rt>こう ほ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>第一位</rb><rt>だい いち い</rt></ruby>はあの<ruby><rb>令嬢</rb><rt>れい じょう</rt></ruby>だと、もっぱらのうわさだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Rumor has it that that young lady is the top contender to become the prince’s bride.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>もうすぐ<ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>きな<ruby><rb>異動</rb><rt>い どう</rt></ruby>があると、<ruby><rb>社内</rb><rt>しゃ ない</rt></ruby>ではもっぱらのうわさになっている。</span>／<span class="translation">The rumor within the company is that there will be a big relocation soon.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used in conjunction with 評判 or うわさ, this expresses the meaning that “everyone is saying (something).”</div></body></html>