<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>おそれがある</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0096.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【おそらく】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0098.xhtml">【おなじ】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x8250">【おそれがある】</h1><h4 class="info">［Nのおそれがある］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-るおそれがある］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>今夜</rb><rt>こん や</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>明日</rb><rt>あ す</rt></ruby>にかけて<ruby><rb>津波</rb><rt>つ なみ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>恐</rb><rt>おそ</rt></ruby>れがあるので、<ruby><rb>厳重</rb><rt>げん じゅう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>注意</rb><rt>ちゅう い</rt></ruby>してください。</span>／<span class="translation">From tonight until tomorrow, there is a possibility that a tsunami may occur, so please take all necessary precautions.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>再</rb><rt>ふたた</rt></ruby>び<ruby><rb>噴火</rb><rt>ふん か</rt></ruby>する<ruby><rb>恐</rb><rt>おそ</rt></ruby>れがあるため、<ruby><rb>警戒</rb><rt>けい かい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>区域</rb><rt>く いき</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>住民</rb><rt>じゅう みん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>避難</rb><rt>ひ なん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>勧告</rb><rt>かんこく</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>だ</rt></ruby>された。</span>／<span class="translation">Since there is a risk that the volcano may erupt again, an advisory was issued for local inhabitants within the danger zone to evacuate.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>親鳥</rb><rt>おや どり</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>気付</rb><rt>き づ</rt></ruby>かれる<ruby><rb>恐</rb><rt>おそ</rt></ruby>れがあることから、<ruby><rb>撮影</rb><rt>さつ えい</rt></ruby>チームはそれ<ruby><rb>以上</rb><rt>い じょう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>巣</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>近</rb><rt>ちか</rt></ruby>づくことをあきらめた。</span>／<span class="translation">Because there was a possibility that the parent birds might notice them, the camera crew gave up approaching the nest any more closely.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>ハリケーンの<ruby><rb>被害</rb><rt>ひ がい</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>拡大</rb><rt>かく だい</rt></ruby>する<ruby><rb>恐</rb><rt>おそ</rt></ruby>れが<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>てきたため、<ruby><rb>大統領</rb><rt>だい とう りょう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>各国</rb><rt>かっ こく</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>緊急</rb><rt>きん きゅう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>援助</rb><rt>えん じょ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>求</rb><rt>もと</rt></ruby>める<ruby><rb>予定</rb><rt>よ てい</rt></ruby>である。</span>／<span class="translation">Since there is a danger that the hurricane damage may become even more extensive, the president is planning to seek emergency assistance from each country.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses the possibility that an undesirable event will happen. Similar expressions include 危険がある (there is a danger) and 不安がある (there is a fear). A formal expression often found in written language. Commonly used in television news, newspaper commentaries, and so on.</div></body></html>