<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>たいてい</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0365.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【だいたい】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0367.xhtml">【たいへん】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x28949">【たいてい】</h1><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>あの<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>は、たいてい9<ruby><rb>時</rb><rt>じ</rt></ruby>ごろ<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>ます。8<ruby><rb>時</rb><rt>じ</rt></ruby>ごろの<ruby><rb>時</rb><rt>とき</rt></ruby>もありますが。</span>／<span class="translation">That person generally arrives at around nine o’clock... but sometimes at eight or so.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>朝食</rb><rt>ちょう しょく</rt></ruby>は、たいていパンですね。</span>／<span class="translation">I usually have bread for breakfast.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>そんなに<ruby><rb>遠</rb><rt>とお</rt></ruby>くない<ruby><rb>所</rb><rt>ところ</rt></ruby>なら、たいていは<ruby><rb>自転車</rb><rt>じ てん しゃ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>使</rb><rt>つか</rt></ruby>うことにしています。</span>／<span class="translation">If I’m going somewhere that’s not very far, I usually try to use my bicycle.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>試験</rb><rt>し けん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>成績</rb><rt>せい せき</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>悪</rb><rt>わる</rt></ruby>かった<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>は、たいていの<ruby><rb>場合</rb><rt>ば あい</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>追試</rb><rt>つい し</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>受</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>けることになっています。</span>／<span class="translation">In most cases, students who get a bad score are expected to take a make-up exam.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used with respect to habitual activities and expresses that their frequency or probability is high. Cannot be used to make a conjecture about the future.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>今晩はたいてい7時には帰るでしょう。／He’ll generally be back by seven o’clock tonight.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>今晩はおそらく7時には帰るでしょう。／He’ll probably be back by seven o’clock tonight.</div><div class="explanation">May be used in the forms たいていは and たいていの場合 (は). When used in the form たいていのN, as in たいていの人 (most people) or たいていの町 (most towns), it means that there is a high proportion of something and it can be replaced by 大部分のN (the majority of N). たいがい (most) can also be used.</div></body></html>