<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>かわりに</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0176.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【かわきりに】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0178.xhtml">【きく】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x14230">【かわりに】</h1><h4 class="info">［Nのかわりに］</h4><h4 class="info">［Vかわりに］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>わたしのかわりに<ruby><rb>山田</rb><rt>やま だ</rt></ruby>さんが<ruby><rb>会議</rb><rt>かい ぎ</rt></ruby>にでる<ruby><rb>予定</rb><rt>よ てい</rt></ruby>です。</span>／<span class="translation">Instead of me, Yamada-san will attend the meeting.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>ママは<ruby><rb>熱</rb><rt>ねつ</rt></ruby>があるので、きょうはパパがかわりにむかえに<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ってあげる。</span>／<span class="translation">Dad: Your mom has a fever, so today I’ll pick you up instead.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>じゃあ、きょうはぼくが<ruby><rb>作</rb><rt>つく</rt></ruby>るかわりに、あしたかぜがなおってたらきみが<ruby><rb>料理</rb><rt>りょう り</rt></ruby>するんだぞ。</span>／<span class="translation">OK, I’ll cook today and then you can cook tomorrow, if you’re over your cold.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>今度</rb><rt>こん ど</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>転勤</rb><rt>てん きん</rt></ruby>して<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>たこのまちはしずかでおちついているかわりに<ruby><rb>交通</rb><rt>こう つう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>便</rb><rt>べん</rt></ruby>がややわるい。</span>／<span class="translation">While the town I was transferred to this time is quiet and calm, the public transportation is not so good.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>のような<ruby><rb>生</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>かた</rt></ruby>をしていたんでは、<ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>きな<ruby><rb>失敗</rb><rt>しっ ぱい</rt></ruby>もしない<ruby><rb>代</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>わりに、<ruby><rb>胸</rb><rt>むね</rt></ruby>おどるような<ruby><rb>経験</rb><rt>けい けん</rt></ruby>もないだろうね。</span>／<span class="translation">Living like she does means that there aren’t any big failures, but on the other hand, nothing thrilling happens, you know?</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses substitution of other people or things, as in (1), (2), and (3). Also expresses that, while there is a good aspect to something, there is also a bad aspect, or vice versa, as in (4) and (5).</div></body></html>