<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>といったらない</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0537.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【といったらありゃしない】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0539.xhtml">【といって】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x50508">【といったらない】</h1><h4 class="info">［Nといったらない］</h4><h4 class="info">［A-い（とい）ったらない］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>花嫁</rb><rt>はなよめ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>衣装</rb><rt>い しょう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>着</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>た<ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>美</rb><rt>うつく</rt></ruby>しさといったらなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">Wearing her bridal costume, she was indescribably beautiful.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>みんなが<ruby><rb>帰</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>っていったあと、<ruby><rb>一人</rb><rt>ひとり</rt></ruby>きりで<ruby><rb>病室</rb><rt>びょう しつ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>取</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>り<ruby><rb>残</rb><rt>のこ</rt></ruby>されたときの<ruby><rb>寂</rb><rt>さび</rt></ruby>しさといったらなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">Left all by myself in the hospital room after everyone had gone home, my loneliness was beyond description. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>会議中</rb><rt>かい ぎ ちゅう</rt></ruby>にまじめな<ruby><rb>顔</rb><rt>かお</rt></ruby>をして<ruby><rb>冗談</rb><rt>じょう だん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>うんだから、おかしいったらないよ。</span>／<span class="translation">The way he tells jokes with a straight face during our meetings is too funny for words.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>結婚</rb><rt>けっ こん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>以来</rb><rt>い らい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>まで 10 <ruby><rb>年</rb><rt>ねん</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>別居</rb><rt>べっ きょ</rt></ruby>せざるをえなかった<ruby><rb>妻</rb><rt>つま</rt></ruby>とやっと<ruby><rb>一緒</rb><rt>いっ しょ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>暮</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>らせるのだ。うれしいといったらない。</span>／<span class="translation">Ever since we got married ten years ago, my wife and I have had to live apart, and now we can finally be together. I can't tell you how happy I am!</span></div><div class="explanation">Attached to nouns or <i>i</i>-adjectives to emphasize an extreme degree of something. Means “so...that it can’t be expressed in words” or “there is nothing else as...as.” In spoken language, the form ...ったらない may also be used. Although といったらありはしない conveys the same meaning as といったらない, the former is used only when expressing a negative evaluation of something (dissatisfaction, criticism, etc.). </div></body></html>