<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ものの</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part1007.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ものなら】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part1009.xhtml">【ものを】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x99786">【ものの】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x99788"><span class="number">1. </span>...ものの</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>輸入</rb><rt>ゆ にゅう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>果物</rb><rt>くだ もの</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>高</rb><rt>たか</rt></ruby>いもののめずらしいらしく、<ruby><rb>人気</rb><rt>にん き</rt></ruby>があってよく<ruby><rb>売</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>れている。</span>／<span class="translation">Imported fruit is expensive, but perhaps because people seem to find it unusual, it is popular and sells well.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>新</rb><rt>あたら</rt></ruby>しい<ruby><rb>登山靴</rb><rt>と ざん ぐつ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>ったものの、<ruby><rb>忙</rb><rt>いそが</rt></ruby>しくてまだ<ruby><rb>一度</rb><rt>いち ど</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>山</rb><rt>やま</rt></ruby>へ<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>っていない。</span>／<span class="translation">I bought new hiking boots, but I’ve been busy and have yet to go to the mountains even once.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>今日</rb><rt>きょう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>中</rb><rt>じゅう</rt></ruby>にこの<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>をやりますと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ったものの、とてもできそうにない。</span>／<span class="translation">I said I would finish this work by the end of today, but it doesn’t look at all possible.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>自然</rb><rt>し ぜん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>多</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>郊外</rb><rt>こう がい</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>家</rb><rt>いえ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>ったものの、<ruby><rb>休</rb><rt>やす</rt></ruby>みの<ruby><rb>日</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>寝</rb><rt>ね</rt></ruby>てばかりだ。</span>／<span class="translation">I bought a house in the suburbs with lots of undisturbed nature (close by), but on my days off I just sleep.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>次</rb><rt>つぎ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>企画</rb><rt>き かく</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>始</rb><rt>はじ</rt></ruby>めるお<ruby><rb>金</rb><rt>かね</rt></ruby>はあるものの、アイデアがなくて<ruby><rb>困</rb><rt>こま</rt></ruby>っている。</span>／<span class="translation">I have the money to start the next project, but I just can’t come up with any ideas for it.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>招待状</rb><rt>しょう たい じょう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>だ</rt></ruby>したものの、まだほかの<ruby><rb>準備</rb><rt>じゅん び</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>全</rb><rt>まった</rt></ruby>くできていない。</span>／<span class="translation">I have sent out the written invitations, but I still haven’t been able to do any other preparations at all.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（7）</span><ruby><rb>先月</rb><rt>せん げつ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>久</rb><rt>ひさ</rt></ruby>しぶりに<ruby><rb>東京</rb><rt>とう きょう</rt></ruby>へ<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>った。<ruby><rb>大学</rb><rt>だい がく</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>時代</rb><rt>じ だい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>友人</rb><rt>ゆう じん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>電話</rb><rt>でん わ</rt></ruby>でもかけてみようとは<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>ったものの、<ruby><rb>忙</rb><rt>いそが</rt></ruby>しさにまぎれて、つい、そのままにしてしまった。</span>／<span class="translation">Last month I went to Tokyo for the first time in a long time on business. I wanted to give one of my college friends a call or something, but I ended up being so busy that it ultimately never happened.</span></div><div class="explanation">Mentioning a past event or a current situation, used to continue the sentence and means “but/however....” Afterwards, the sentence usually continues with a statement that what was expected to occur did not or does not look likely to occur.</div><div class="explanation">Example (1) means “they are expensive and, therefore, not likely to sell well and yet they do.” With phrases such as やるといったのにむずかしい in example (3), phrases which express that “(the speaker) has no confidence in the situation that is to follow” or “it is difficult” often continue the sentence and relate to a thing they have said, or done, or to a particular circumstance.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x99852"><span class="number">2. </span>...とはいうものの</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>四月</rb><rt>し がつ</rt></ruby>とはいうものの<ruby><rb>風</rb><rt>かぜ</rt></ruby>がつめたく、<ruby><rb>桜</rb><rt>さくら</rt></ruby>もまだだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Although it is April, the wind is cold and the cherry blossoms are late.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>相手</rb><rt>あい て</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>とはいうものの、なかなか<ruby><rb>手</rb><rt>て</rt></ruby>ごわい。</span>／<span class="translation">Although just a child, the opponent is pretty tough.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>「<ruby><rb>石</rb><rt>いし</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>うえ</rt></ruby>にも<ruby><rb>三年</rb><rt>さん ねん</rt></ruby>」とは<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>うものの、こんなに<ruby><rb>訓練</rb><rt>くん れん</rt></ruby>がきびしくてはやめたくなる。</span>／<span class="translation">They say “perseverance prevails” (lit. three years on a (cold) stone (will make the stone warm)), but training like this is hard and makes me think about quitting.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>人間</rb><rt>にん げん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>平等</rb><rt>びょう どう</rt></ruby>だとはいうものの、この<ruby><rb>世</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>不平等</rb><rt>ふ びょう どう</rt></ruby>なことばかりだ。</span>／<span class="translation">All people are equal, but this world is full of inequalities.</span></div><div class="explanation">This means that something which is generally thought does not apply. Example (1) means that “usually in April it is warm and cherry blossoms bloom, but this year that is not the case.” As in example (3), it is often used in proverbs or maxims.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x99889"><span class="number">3. </span>とはいうものの</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>大学</rb><rt>だい がく</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>時代</rb><rt>じ だい</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>英文学</rb><rt>えいぶんがく</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>専攻</rb><rt>せんこう</rt></ruby>だった。とはいうものの、<ruby><rb>英語</rb><rt>えい ご</rt></ruby>はほとんどしゃべれない。</span>／<span class="translation">I majored in English literature in college. Having said that, I can barely speak English.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>車庫</rb><rt>しゃ こ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>付</rb><rt>つ</rt></ruby>きの<ruby><rb>家</rb><rt>いえ</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>ったし、すっかり<ruby><rb>結婚</rb><rt>けっ こん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>準備</rb><rt>じゅん び</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>整</rb><rt>ととの</rt></ruby>っている。とはいうものの、<ruby><rb>肝心</rb><rt>かん じん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>結婚</rb><rt>けっ こん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>相手</rb><rt>あい て</rt></ruby>がまだ<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>つかっていないのが<ruby><rb>悩</rb><rt>なや</rt></ruby>みだ。</span>／<span class="translation">I have bought a house with a garage and all the preparations for marriage are in order. Be that as it may, the crux of the problem is that I still haven’t found someone to marry.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses that the situation is different than what would be expected as a result of the previous statement. Means “that may be so but” or “however.”</div></body></html>