<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>なら1</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0705.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【なまじ】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0707.xhtml">【なら<sub class="variation">2</sub>】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x64870">【なら<sub class="variation">1</sub>】</h1><div class="explanation"> When なら is attached directly to a noun, it expresses the topic of a sentence. The form ならば may also be used.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x64883"><span class="number">1. </span>Nなら</h2><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><span class="number">A:</span>めがねはどこかな。</span>／<span class="translation">I wonder where my glasses are.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>めがねならタンスの<ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>うえ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>置</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>いてありましたよ。</span>／<span class="translation">Your glasses? They were on top of the dresser.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><span class="number">A:</span>アルバイトを<ruby><rb>雇</rb><rt>やと</rt></ruby>うには<ruby><rb>金</rb><rt>かね</rt></ruby>がかかりますよ。</span>／<span class="translation">Hiring a part-time worker will be expensive.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>お<ruby><rb>金</rb><rt>かね</rt></ruby>のことなら<ruby><rb>心配</rb><rt>しん ぱい</rt></ruby>しなくていいですよ。<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>とかなりますから。</span>／<span class="translation">If it’s a matter of money, you don’t have to worry. We can manage.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>佐藤</rb><rt>さ とう</rt></ruby>さん<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>ませんでしたか。</span>／<span class="translation">Have you seen Sato-san?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span><ruby><rb>佐藤</rb><rt>さ とう</rt></ruby>さんなら、<ruby><rb>図書館</rb><rt>と しょ かん</rt></ruby>にいましたよ。</span>／<span class="translation">Sato-san? He was in the library.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby>ならば<ruby><rb>十分</rb><rt>じゅう ぶん</rt></ruby>ありますから、ご<ruby><rb>心配</rb><rt>しん ぱい</rt></ruby>なく。</span>／<span class="translation">As for time, we have plenty of it, so don’t worry.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>例</rb><rt>れい</rt></ruby>のことならもう<ruby><rb>社長</rb><rt>しゃ ちょう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>伝</rb><rt>つた</rt></ruby>えてあります。</span>／<span class="translation">If you mean that thing we talked about, I’ve already informed the company president.</span></div><div class="explanation">なら is used when the speaker takes something that the addressee has said, something mentioned during discussion of the previous topic, or something that can be predicted from the current situation, makes it a new topic, and then continues talking about it. Often used when the speaker adopts as a topic something that was previously brought up by the addressee.</div><div class="explanation">なら can often be replaced by the topic marker は. However, なら essentially has the hypothetical meaning “if N were the topic,” while は does not have such meaning. Therefore, when なら is replaced by は, the meaning of the sentence changes slightly. なら is synonymous with Nだったら, and these two expressions are interchangeable.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x64972"><span class="number">2. </span>NならNだ</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>山</rb><rt>やま</rt></ruby>ならやっぱり<ruby><rb>富士山</rb><rt>ふ じ さん</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">When it comes to mountains, naturally it has to be <i>Fuji-san</i> (Mt. Fuji).</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>ストレス<ruby><rb>解消法</rb><rt>かい しょう ほう</rt></ruby>ならゴルフに<ruby><rb>限</rb><rt>かぎ</rt></ruby>る。</span>／<span class="translation">If you’re looking for a way to get rid of stress, nothing beats golf.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>酒</rb><rt>さけ</rt></ruby>ならなんといってもここの<ruby><rb>地酒</rb><rt>じ ざけ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>一番</rb><rt>いち ばん</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">When it comes to <i>sake</i>, the locally brewed <i>sake</i> here is unquestionably the best.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>カキ<ruby><rb>料理</rb><rt>りょう り</rt></ruby>なら<ruby><rb>広島</rb><rt>ひろ しま</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>本場</rb><rt>ほん ば</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">If you want good oyster cuisine, Hiroshima is the place to go.</span></div><div class="explanation"> Nなら can be followed by Nだ, or by expressions such as Nに限る (there’s nothing better than N), Nが一番だ (N is the best), and Nがいい (N is good). Nなら is used to define the range of the topic and then describe the most highly evaluated item within that range. In this usage, Nなら can be replaced by Nは without any great change in meaning.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x65018"><span class="number">3. </span>...（<ruby><rb>助</rb><rt>じょ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>詞</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>）なら</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>あの<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>となら<ruby><rb>結婚</rb><rt>けっ こん</rt></ruby>してもいい。</span>／<span class="translation">I wouldn’t mind getting married, if it were to him.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>フランス<ruby><rb>語</rb><rt>ご</rt></ruby>はだめですが、<ruby><rb>英語</rb><rt>えい ご</rt></ruby>でなら<ruby><rb>会話</rb><rt>かい わ</rt></ruby>ができます。</span>／<span class="translation">I’m no good at French, but in English, I can carry on a conversation.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>あと<ruby><rb>一人</rb><rt>ひとり</rt></ruby>だけなら<ruby><rb>入場</rb><rt>にゅう じょう</rt></ruby>できます。</span>／<span class="translation">Only one more person can get in.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>足</rb><rt>あし</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>具合</rb><rt>ぐ あい</rt></ruby>はいかがですか。</span>／<span class="translation">How is your leg?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>ゆっくりとなら<ruby><rb>歩</rb><rt>ある</rt></ruby>けるようになりました。</span>／<span class="translation">If I go slowly, I can walk now.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>後</rb><rt>あと</rt></ruby>なら<ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby>があります。</span>／<span class="translation">If it’s after work, I’ll have time.</span></div><div class="explanation">When なら follows a noun, adverb, or noun/particle combination, it expresses the meaning that “Y doesn’t hold in other cases, but in the case of X, Y can be realized.” The Y clause that follows なら usually represents something desirable, and this pattern is used when the speaker actively selects an X that makes Y possible. This usage of なら is similar to the contrastive use of は. However, なら can be combined with interrogative words, while は cannot.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>何時なら都合がいいですか。／What time would be convenient for you?</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>誰となら結婚してもいいですか。／Who would it have to be, in order for you to consider getting married?</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>何時は都合がいいですか。／What is the time convenient for you?</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>誰とは結婚してもいいですか。／I wouldn’t mind marrying who.</div></body></html>