<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>にこしたことはない</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0774.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【にくわえて】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0776.xhtml">【にこたえ】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x71098">【にこしたことはない】</h1><h4 class="info">［Nであるにこしたことはない］</h4><h4 class="info">［Na （である）にこしたことはない］</h4><h4 class="info">［A-いにこしたことはない］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-るにこしたことはない］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>体</rb><rt>からだ</rt></ruby>はじょうぶにこしたことはない。</span>／<span class="translation">Keeping your health is always better.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>金</rb><rt>かね</rt></ruby>はあるにこしたことはない。</span>／<span class="translation">Money is never unnecessary.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>そうじのことを<ruby><rb>考</rb><rt>かんが</rt></ruby>えないかぎり、<ruby><rb>家</rb><rt>いえ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>広</rb><rt>ひろ</rt></ruby>いにこしたことはない。</span>／<span class="translation">As long as you don’t think about cleaning, spacious houses are always better. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>なにごとも<ruby><rb>慎重</rb><rt>しん ちょう</rt></ruby>にやるにこしたことはないといつも<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>っている<ruby><rb>父</rb><rt>ちち</rt></ruby>が、きのう<ruby><rb>階段</rb><rt>かい だん</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>落</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>ちて<ruby><rb>足</rb><rt>あし</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>折</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>った。</span>／<span class="translation">My father, who had kept saying to me that things should always be done carefully, fell down the stairs and broke his leg.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses the meaning of “...is better.” This expression is often used to indicate something naturally considered as common knowledge.</div></body></html>