<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ちなみに</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0416.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ちっとも...ない】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0418.xhtml">【ちゃんと】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x35706">【ちなみに】</h1><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>この<ruby><rb>遊園地</rb><rt>ゆう えん ち</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>訪</rb><rt>おとず</rt></ruby>れた<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>今年</rb><rt>ことし</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>五十</rb><rt>ご じゅう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>万人</rb><rt>まん にん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>のぼ</rt></ruby>りました。これは<ruby><rb>去年</rb><rt>きょ ねん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>三十</rb><rt>さん じゅう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>万人</rb><rt>まん にん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>きく<ruby><rb>上回</rb><rt>うわ まわ</rt></ruby>っています。ちなみに<ruby><rb>迷子</rb><rt>まい ご</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>数</rb><rt>かず</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>千人</rb><rt>せん にん</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>去年</rb><rt>きょ ねん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>倍</rb><rt>ばい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>近</rb><rt>ちか</rt></ruby>くありました。</span>／<span class="translation">The number of visitors to this amusement park reached 500,000 this year, far surpassing last year’s 300,000. Incidentally, the number of lost children was about 1,000, nearly double that of last year.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>この<ruby><rb>人形</rb><rt>にん ぎょう</rt></ruby>はフランスで<ruby><rb>三百</rb><rt>さん びゃく</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>年前</rb><rt>ねん まえ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>作</rb><rt>つく</rt></ruby>られたもので、<ruby><rb>同種</rb><rt>どう しゅ</rt></ruby>のものは<ruby><rb>世界</rb><rt>せ かい</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>五体</rb><rt>ご たい</rt></ruby>しかないといいます。ちなみにお<ruby><rb>値段</rb><rt>ね だん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>一体</rb><rt>いっ たい</rt></ruby>500<ruby><rb>万</rb><rt>まん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>円</rb><rt>えん</rt></ruby>。</span>／<span class="translation">This doll was made in France three hundred years ago, and it’s said that there are only five in the world. For your information, the price for each doll is five million yen.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>山田</rb><rt>やま だ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>議員</rb><rt>ぎ いん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>発言</rb><rt>はつ げん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>政局</rb><rt>せい きょく</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>きな<ruby><rb>混乱</rb><rt>こん らん</rt></ruby>をもたらした。ちなみに<ruby><rb>山田</rb><rt>やま だ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>議員</rb><rt>ぎ いん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>一昨年</rb><rt>おととし</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>議会</rb><rt>ぎ かい</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>爆弾</rb><rt>ばくだん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>発言</rb><rt>はつ げん</rt></ruby>をしている。</span>／<span class="translation">Congressman Yamada’s remark has caused much confusion in the political world. For your information, Yamada also made a bombshell speech in the legislature the year before last.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used when adding something related to the principal matter, and means “for your reference....” Used in written language or formal spoken language (e.g. news reports or meetings). This expression cannot be used for expressing an additional action.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>買い物に出かけた。ちなみに、友達のところに寄った。／I went shopping. For your reference, I went to my friend’s place. </div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>買い物に出かけた。ついでに、友達のところに寄った。／I went shopping. I also stopped by a friend’s house while I was out.</div></body></html>