<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>からいい</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0153.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【からある】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0155.xhtml">【からいう】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x12990">【からいい】</h1><h4 class="info">［N／Na　だからいい］</h4><h4 class="info">［A／V　からいい］</h4><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x12996"><span class="number">1. </span>...からいいが</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>まだ<ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby>はあるからいいが、<ruby><rb>今度</rb><rt>こん ど</rt></ruby>からはもうちょっと<ruby><rb>早</rb><rt>はや</rt></ruby>く<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>るようにしなさい。</span>／<span class="translation">It’s all right, because we have time. But you should come a little earlier next time.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>ネギ、<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>ってくるの<ruby><rb>忘</rb><rt>わす</rt></ruby>れたの？　まあ、<ruby><rb>少</rb><rt>すこ</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>残</rb><rt>のこ</rt></ruby>っているからいいけど。</span>／<span class="translation">Did you forget to buy leeks? Well, there are some left, so I guess it’s OK.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>え？　<ruby><rb>今日</rb><rt>きょう</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>休</rb><rt>やす</rt></ruby>むの？　まあ、あまり<ruby><rb>忙</rb><rt>いそが</rt></ruby>しくない<ruby><rb>時期</rb><rt>じ き</rt></ruby>だからいいけど。</span>／<span class="translation">What? You’re taking today off, too? Well, it’s not such busy time, so I guess it’s all right.</span></div><div class="explanation">Takes the form からいいが or からいいけど and means “it is not a big problem, because of such-and-such.” Used in spoken language.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x13027"><span class="number">2. </span>...からいいようなものの</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>きな<ruby><rb>事故</rb><rt>じ こ</rt></ruby>にならなかったからいいようなものの、これからはもっと<ruby><rb>慎重</rb><rt>しん ちょう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>運転</rb><rt>うん てん</rt></ruby>しなさい。</span>／<span class="translation">It’s all right since it wasn’t a serious accident, but you should drive more carefully from now on.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>だれも<ruby><rb>文句</rb><rt>もん く</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ってこないからいいようなものの、<ruby><rb>一</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>つ<ruby><rb>間違</rb><rt>ま ちが</rt></ruby>えば<ruby><rb>大事故</rb><rt>だい じ こ</rt></ruby>になっていたところだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Since no one complained about it, it’s all right, but it could have been a terrible accident.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>保険</rb><rt>ほ けん</rt></ruby>をかけてあるからいいようなものの、そうでなければ<ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>たい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>変</rb><rt>へん</rt></ruby>なことになっていたよ。</span>／<span class="translation">Thank goodness we took out insurance; otherwise, we could have been in serious trouble.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>ちょうどタクシーが<ruby><rb>通</rb><rt>とお</rt></ruby>りかかったからいいようなものの、あやうく<ruby><rb>遅刻</rb><rt>ち こく</rt></ruby>するところだった。</span>／<span class="translation">It’s a good thing a taxi passed by just then—I wouldn’t have made it otherwise.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>大事</rb><rt>だい じ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>至</rb><rt>いた</rt></ruby>らなかったからいいようなものの、<ruby><rb>今回</rb><rt>こん かい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>事故</rb><rt>じ こ</rt></ruby>によって、<ruby><rb>政府</rb><rt>せい ふ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>原子力</rb><rt>げん し りょく</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>政策</rb><rt>せいさく</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>見直</rb><rt>み なお</rt></ruby>しをせまられそうだ。</span>／<span class="translation">It was fortunate that it didn’t lead to something serious, but this accident will force the Government to take a hard look at its nuclear energy policies. </span></div><div class="explanation">Implies that the worst situation was avoided, but the outcome is still not favorable. Similar in meaning to からいいが／けど, but conveys a stronger feeling of criticism or rebuke.</div></body></html>