<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ことだろう</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0218.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ことだし】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0220.xhtml">【ことで】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x17560">【ことだろう】</h1><h4 class="info">［Na　な／である　ことだろう］</h4><h4 class="info">［A／V　ことだろう］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>会</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>っていないが、<ruby><rb>山田</rb><rt>やま だ</rt></ruby>さんのこどもさんもさぞおおきくなったことだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">I haven’t seen them, but I suppose that Yamada-san’s children must have really grown up.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>市内</rb><rt>し ない</rt></ruby>でこんなにふっているのだから、<ruby><rb>山</rb><rt>やま</rt></ruby>のほうではきっとひどい<ruby><rb>雪</rb><rt>ゆき</rt></ruby>になっていることだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">Since it’s falling this hard in the city, there must be a terrible snowstorm in the mountains.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>《<ruby><rb>手紙</rb><rt>て がみ</rt></ruby>》<ruby><rb>息子</rb><rt>むすこ</rt></ruby>さん、<ruby><rb>大学</rb><rt>だい がく</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>合格</rb><rt>ごう かく</rt></ruby>とのこと。さぞかしお<ruby><rb>喜</rb><rt>よろこ</rt></ruby>びのことでございましょう。</span>／<span class="translation">《letter》We heard that your son passed his university entrance examination. You must be so very pleased.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>この<ruby><rb>誘拐</rb><rt>ゆう かい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>事件</rb><rt>じ けん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>人質</rb><rt>ひと じち</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>安全</rb><rt>あん ぜん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>考慮</rb><rt>こう りょ</rt></ruby>して<ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>はふせられているが、<ruby><rb>公表</rb><rt>こう ひょう</rt></ruby>されれば、まちがいなく<ruby><rb>社会</rb><rt>しゃ かい</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>きな<ruby><rb>衝撃</rb><rt>しょう げき</rt></ruby>をあたえることだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">This kidnapping case is presently being kept quiet out of consideration for the safety of the hostage, but once it’s made public, there’s no question it will cause a great shock to our society. </span></div><div class="explanation">Attaches to a clause and indicates a conjecture. It is also possible just to say だろう; however, ことだろう is a more formal expression that is suited to written language and used to make empathetic conjectures about things that are not known in the here and now. When used with the adverb さぞ（かし） (how, surely), as in (1), this expression conveys an even stronger emotional involvement.</div></body></html>