<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ずにおく</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0299.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ずにいる】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0301.xhtml">【ずにすむ】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x23074">【ずにおく】</h1><h4 class="info">［V-ずにおく］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>父</rb><rt>ちち</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>電話</rb><rt>でん わ</rt></ruby>がかかってきたが、<ruby><rb>疲</rb><rt>つか</rt></ruby>れてよく<ruby><rb>寝</rb><rt>ね</rt></ruby>ているようだったので<ruby><rb>起</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>こさずにおいた。</span>／<span class="translation">There was a telephone call for my father, but since he was tired and sleeping soundly, I didn’t wake him up. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>がショックを<ruby><rb>受</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>けるとかわいそうだから、このことは<ruby><rb>当分</rb><rt>とう ぶん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>わずにおきましょう。</span>／<span class="translation">It would be cruel to give her such a shock, so let’s not tell her about this for the time being.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>あとでいるかもしれないと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>って、もらったお<ruby><rb>金</rb><rt>かね</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>使</rb><rt>つか</rt></ruby>わずにおいた。</span>／<span class="translation">I thought I might need it later, so I didn’t use the money I had received. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>あした<ruby><rb>病院</rb><rt>びょう いん</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>検査</rb><rt>けん さ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>受</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>けるなら、<ruby><rb>夕飯</rb><rt>ゆう はん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べずにおいたほうがいいんじゃないですか。</span>／<span class="translation">If you’re going to have tests done at the hospital tomorrow, isn’t it better not to have any dinner? </span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses that, for some reason, a certain action is deliberately not taken. </div></body></html>