<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>のに1</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0871.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【のではなかろうか】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0873.xhtml">【のに<sub class="variation">2</sub>】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x77722">【のに<sub class="variation">1</sub>】</h1><h4 class="info">［N／Na　なのに］</h4><h4 class="info">［A-い／A-かった　のに］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-る／V-た　のに］</h4><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x77734"><span class="number">1. </span>...のに〈mid-sentence〉</h2><div class="explanation">Placed after a clause and used in the pattern XのにY. Expresses that the result Y is not what X would naturally lead one to expect, but something contradictory. Both X and Y express an established fact. This means that expressions indicating a situation that is not established as a fact, such as questions, commands, requests, invitations, intentions, desires, or suppositions, cannot usually appear in Y.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>雨が降っているのに出かけなさい。／Even though it’s raining, go out.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>雨が降っているのに出かけたい。／Even though it’s raining, I want to go out.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>雨が降っているのに出かけるだろう。／Even though it’s raining, I’ll probably go out.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x77777"><span class="number">a. </span>...のに〈converse cause〉</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>5<ruby><rb>月</rb><rt>がつ</rt></ruby>なのに<ruby><rb>真夏</rb><rt>ま なつ</rt></ruby>のように<ruby><rb>暑</rb><rt>あつ</rt></ruby>い。</span>／<span class="translation">Although it’s May, it’s as hot as the middle of summer.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>家</rb><rt>いえ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>近</rb><rt>ちか</rt></ruby>いのによく<ruby><rb>遅刻</rb><rt>ち こく</rt></ruby>する。</span>／<span class="translation">Even though she lives close by, she’s often late.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>雨</rb><rt>あめ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>降</rb><rt>ふ</rt></ruby>っているのに<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>かけていった。</span>／<span class="translation">Despite the rain, I went out.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>真夜中</rb><rt>ま よ なか</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>過</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>ぎたのにまだ<ruby><rb>帰</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>ってこない。</span>／<span class="translation">It’s already past midnight, but he hasn’t come back yet.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>今日</rb><rt>きょう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>日曜日</rb><rt>にち よう び</rt></ruby>なのに<ruby><rb>会社</rb><rt>かい しゃ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>くんですか。</span>／<span class="translation">Even though today is Sunday, you’re going to work?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span>5<ruby><rb>月</rb><rt>がつ</rt></ruby>なのに<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>でこんなに<ruby><rb>暑</rb><rt>あつ</rt></ruby>いんだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">Why is it so hot, even though it’s still May?</span></div><div class="explanation">In this use of the pattern XのにY, there is a causal relation between X and Y, but this causal relation is not realized.</div><div class="explanation">For example, のに in (3) expresses that the usual causal relation, which is “because it was raining, I didn’t go out,” is not established; rather, two incompatible conditions are realized at the same time. This usage is often accompanied by the speaker’s surprise or doubt regarding an unexpected result or discrepancy.</div><div class="explanation">In (6), のに is used to ask the reason for the current situation, which is unexpected. It expresses the speaker’s sense of surprise and misgiving. </div><div class="explanation">(5) is an interrogative sentence, but のに can be used in this case. The reason is that the situation of the addressee going to work (= Y) is an established fact. The speaker is astonished that “even though it’s Sunday, you’re going to work,” and this interrogative sentence uses the form のですか to ask a question about this fact.</div><div class="explanation">In contrast, an interrogative sentence without のだ that asks if the addressee is going to work would be unnatural, as below.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>今日は日曜日なのに会社に行きますか。／Even though today is Sunday, are you going to work?</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x77876"><span class="number">b. </span>...のに〈contrast〉</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>昨日</rb><rt>きのう</rt></ruby>はいい<ruby><rb>天気</rb><rt>てん き</rt></ruby>だったのに<ruby><rb>今日</rb><rt>きょう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>雨</rb><rt>あめ</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">It was nice yesterday, but today it’s raining.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>あの<ruby><rb>中国人</rb><rt>ちゅう ごく じん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>日本語</rb><rt>に ほん ご</rt></ruby>はあまり<ruby><rb>上手</rb><rt>じょう ず</rt></ruby>でないのに、<ruby><rb>英語</rb><rt>えい ご</rt></ruby>はうまい。</span>／<span class="translation">Even though that Chinese person isn’t very good at Japanese, his English is good.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>お<ruby><rb>兄</rb><rt>にい</rt></ruby>さんはよく<ruby><rb>勉強</rb><rt>べん きょう</rt></ruby>するのに<ruby><rb>弟</rb><rt>おとうと</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>授業</rb><rt>じゅ ぎょう</rt></ruby>をよく<ruby><rb>サボる</rb><rt>さぼる</rt></ruby>。</span>／<span class="translation">The older brother studies hard, while the younger one often skips class.</span></div><div class="explanation">In this usage, XのにY expresses a contrast between X and Y, not a causal relation.</div><div class="explanation">For example, in (2) there is a contrastive relation between X, which is 日本語が上手でない (<span class="noSeparate">s/he</span> is not good at Japanese), and Y, which is 英語がうまい (<span class="noSeparate">s/he</span> is good at English), and のに links X and Y. The relation between X and Y is not a causal relation, like “because that Chinese person is not good at Japanese, <span class="noSeparate">s/he</span> is good at English.” </div><div class="explanation">のに in (2) can be paraphrased as けれども or が (see below). However, while けれども and が express a simple contrastive relation between the first and second clauses, のに implies that the relation between X and Y deviates from the one usually expected and that the speaker feels it is “unusual” or “strange.”</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>あの中国人は日本語はあまり上手でない｛けれども／が｝、英語はうまい。／That Chinese person isn’t very good at Japanese, but <span class="noSeparate">his/her</span> English is good.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x77939"><span class="number">c. </span>...のに〈unexpected〉</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>合格</rb><rt>ごう かく</rt></ruby>すると<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>っていたのに、<ruby><rb>不合格</rb><rt>ふ ごう かく</rt></ruby>だった。</span>／<span class="translation">I thought I would pass the exam, but I failed.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>今晩</rb><rt>こん ばん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>中</rb><rt>じゅう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>電話</rb><rt>でん わ</rt></ruby>するつもりだったのに、うっかり<ruby><rb>忘</rb><rt>わす</rt></ruby>れてしまった。</span>／<span class="translation">I intended to make a phone call tonight, but it slipped my mind.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>和子</rb><rt>かず こ</rt></ruby>さんには<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>てほしかったのに、<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>てくれなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">I especially wanted Kazuko-san to come, but she didn’t.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>せっかくおいでくださったのに、<ruby><rb>申</rb><rt>もう</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>訳</rb><rt>わけ</rt></ruby>ございませんでした。</span>／<span class="translation">After you took the trouble to come all the way here...I really must apologize.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses that an outcome is different from what was expected or predicted.</div><div class="explanation">In examples (1)-(3), X (in the pattern XのにY) is an expression of expectation, intention, or desire, such as ...と思っていた (I thought...), つもりだった (I intended), or 来てほしかった (I wanted (her) to come). Y describes an outcome that is contrary to X.</div><div class="explanation">(4) means せっかくお出でくださったのに、(留守にしていて)申し訳ございません (you took the trouble to come all the way here, so I really must apologize (for being out)). However, the outcome 留守にしていて (for being out) is not actually verbalized, and のに is followed immediately by the speaker’s expression of apology for the unexpected outcome.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x77997"><span class="number">2. </span>...のに〈sentence-final〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>スピードを<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>だ</rt></ruby>すから<ruby><rb>事故</rb><rt>じ こ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>起</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>こしたんだ。ゆっくり<ruby><rb>走</rb><rt>はし</rt></ruby>れと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>っておいたのに。</span>／<span class="translation">You had an accident because you drive too fast. I told you before you went out that you should drive slowly!</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>絶対</rb><rt>ぜっ たい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>るとあんなに<ruby><rb>固</rb><rt>かた</rt></ruby>く<ruby><rb>約束</rb><rt>やく そく</rt></ruby>したのに。</span>／<span class="translation">After he’d promised so firmly that he would definitely come!</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>もっと<ruby><rb>早</rb><rt>はや</rt></ruby>く<ruby><rb>出発</rb><rt>しゅっ ぱつ</rt></ruby>すればよかったのに。</span>／<span class="translation">We should have left earlier. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>あなたも<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>ればいいのに。</span>／<span class="translation">You really should come, too!</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>あと5<ruby><rb>秒</rb><rt>びょう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>早</rb><rt>はや</rt></ruby>ければ<ruby><rb>始発</rb><rt>し はつ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>電車</rb><rt>でん しゃ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>間</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>合</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>ったのに。</span>／<span class="translation">If I’d arrived five seconds earlier, I would have made the first train. </span></div><div class="explanation">Used at the end of a sentence to express a feeling of regret regarding a result that differs from what was expected. Often used when the speaker is criticizing or complaining about someone else’s actions, or at the end of a counter-factual conditional sentence, as in (5).</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x78040"><span class="number">3. </span>せっかく...のに<span class="reference">→<a href="part0312.xhtml#idsubtitlex1x24458">【せっかく】5</a></span></h2><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x78048"><span class="number">4. </span>Nでも...のに</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>電気屋</rb><rt>でん き や</rt></ruby>でも<ruby><rb>直</rb><rt>なお</rt></ruby>せないのに、あなたに<ruby><rb>直</rb><rt>なお</rt></ruby>せるはずがないじゃないの。</span>／<span class="translation">Even an electrician can’t fix it, so how should you be able to fix it?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>九州</rb><rt>きゅう しゅう</rt></ruby>でもこんなに<ruby><rb>寒</rb><rt>さむ</rt></ruby>いのに、まして<ruby><rb>北海道</rb><rt>ほっ かい どう</rt></ruby>はどんなに<ruby><rb>寒</rb><rt>さむ</rt></ruby>いだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">If it’s this cold even in Kyushu, how cold must it be in Hokkaido?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>こんな<ruby><rb>簡単</rb><rt>かん たん</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>問題</rb><rt>もん だい</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>小学生</rb><rt>しょう がく せい</rt></ruby>でも<ruby><rb>解</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>けるのに、どうして<ruby><rb>間違</rb><rt>ま ちが</rt></ruby>えたりしたの？</span>／<span class="translation">Even an elementary school student could solve such an easy problem, so why did you get it wrong?</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses the development of a logical argument, as in “if N, then something is supposed to be such-and-such, but that was not the result (e.g. I thought an electrician would be able to fix it, but <span class="noSeparate">s/he</span> couldn’t)” and “even N is such-and-such, so someone/something with less potential than N is all the more such-and-such (e.g. it is even more difficult for you, as a non-professional, to fix it).”</div></body></html>