<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>それから</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0339.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【それが】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0341.xhtml">【それこそ】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x26829">【それから】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x26831"><span class="number">1. </span>それから</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>まず<ruby><rb>玉子</rb><rt>たま ご</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>黄身</rb><rt>き み</rt></ruby>だけよくかき<ruby><rb>混</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>ぜて<ruby><rb>下</rb><rt>くだ</rt></ruby>さい。それからサラダ<ruby><rb>油</rb><rt>あぶら</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>用意</rb><rt>よう い</rt></ruby>しておいた<ruby><rb>調味料</rb><rt>ちょう み りょう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>加</rb><rt>くわ</rt></ruby>え、<ruby><rb>混</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>ぜ<ruby><rb>合</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>わせます。</span>／<span class="translation">First, take the egg yolks and beat them well. Then add the salad oil and the seasonings you’ve already prepared, and mix them all together.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>となりの<ruby><rb>奥</rb><rt>おく</rt></ruby>さんにはおとといマーケットで<ruby><rb>会</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>いました。それから<ruby><rb>一度</rb><rt>いち ど</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>かけていません。</span>／<span class="translation">I met the wife from next door at the market the day before yesterday. I haven’t seen her since.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>高校</rb><rt>こう こう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>時代</rb><rt>じ だい</rt></ruby>にある<ruby><rb>事件</rb><rt>じ けん</rt></ruby>のためひどく<ruby><rb>傷</rb><rt>きず</rt></ruby>ついた。そしてそれから<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>信</rb><rt>しん</rt></ruby>じなくなってしまった。</span>／<span class="translation">He was deeply hurt by an incident in high school. After that he stopped trusting other people.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>きのうは<ruby><rb>夕方</rb><rt>ゆう がた</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>一度</rb><rt>いち ど</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>家</rb><rt>いえ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>帰</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>って、それから<ruby><rb>家族</rb><rt>か ぞく</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>食事</rb><rt>しょく じ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>かけました。</span>／<span class="translation">Yesterday evening I first went home, and then I went out for dinner with my family.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>あの<ruby><rb>日</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby>のことはよく<ruby><rb>覚</rb><rt>おぼ</rt></ruby>えています。<ruby><rb>改札口</rb><rt>かい さつ ぐち</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>て、それから<ruby><rb>駅前</rb><rt>えき まえ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>喫茶店</rb><rt>きっ さ てん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>はい</rt></ruby>ろうとしたときに<ruby><rb>男</rb><rt>おとこ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>がぶつかってきたんです。</span>／<span class="translation">I remember that day very well. I exited the ticket gate, and then as I was about to go into a coffee shop in front of the station, a man bumped into me. </span></div><div class="explanation">Indicates that events occur sequentially over time. Means “after that, and then.” Used in spoken language. Often used after the <i>te</i>-form of a verb in the pattern V-て、それから, as in (4) and (5).</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>昨日は風邪をひいていました。それから学校を休みました。／I had a cold yesterday. And then I didn’t go to school.</div><div class="explanation">When giving a reason, use それで (so, that is why), それだから (therefore), etc.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x26896"><span class="number">2. </span>NそれからN</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>夏休</rb><rt>なつ やす</rt></ruby>みにタイ、マレーシアそれからインドネシアの3カ<ruby><rb>国</rb><rt>こく</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>回</rb><rt>まわ</rt></ruby>ってきた。</span>／<span class="translation">During the summer vacation I traveled around three countries: Thailand, Malaysia, and Indonesia.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>カレーとミニサラダ、あっそれからコーヒーもお<ruby><rb>願</rb><rt>ねが</rt></ruby>いします。</span>／<span class="translation">I’d like curry and a small salad, oh, and also some coffee.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>初級</rb><rt>しょ きゅう</rt></ruby>のクラスは<ruby><rb>月曜日</rb><rt>げつ よう び</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>水曜日</rb><rt>すい よう び</rt></ruby>、それから<ruby><rb>土曜日</rb><rt>ど よう び</rt></ruby>にやっています。</span>／<span class="translation">We have a beginners’ class on Mondays, Wednesdays, and Saturdays.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>担当</rb><rt>たん とう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>山田</rb><rt>やま だ</rt></ruby>さん、それから<ruby><rb>松本</rb><rt>まつ もと</rt></ruby>さん、この<ruby><rb>二人</rb><rt>ふたり</rt></ruby>です。</span>／<span class="translation">There are two people in charge: Yamada-san and Matsumoto-san.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>この<ruby><rb>時期</rb><rt>じ き</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>海外旅行</rb><rt>かい がい りょ こう</rt></ruby>としましては、<ruby><rb>香港</rb><rt>ほん こん</rt></ruby>それから<ruby><rb>台湾</rb><rt>たい わん</rt></ruby>といったところが<ruby><rb>人気</rb><rt>にん き</rt></ruby>がありますね。</span>／<span class="translation">For a trip abroad at this time of year, Hong Kong and Taiwan are popular destinations.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used when listing a series of similar matters or things. Means “and.” If nouns are being listed, a chronological sequence is not implied. Used in spoken language.</div></body></html>