<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ではないか2</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0484.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ではないか<sub class="variation">1</sub>】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0486.xhtml">【ではないだろうか】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x44039">【ではないか<sub class="variation">2</sub>】</h1><h4 class="info">［N／Na　（なの）ではないか］</h4><h4 class="info">［A／V　のではないか］</h4><div class="explanation">Although this form can be attached directly to nouns or to <i>na</i>-adjectives without inserting の, in the case of <i>i</i>-adjectives and verbs, の must be inserted, resulting in the form のではないか. This point distinguishes ではないか<sub>2</sub> from ではないか<sub>1</sub>. In casual speech, men use （ん）じゃないか and women use forms such as （ん）じゃない and んじゃないの. The polite forms are （の）ではないですか and （の）ではありませんか.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x44068"><span class="number">1. </span>...（の）ではないか</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>あそこを<ruby><rb>歩</rb><rt>ある</rt></ruby>いているのは、もしかして<ruby><rb>山下</rb><rt>やま した</rt></ruby>さんではないか。</span>／<span class="translation">Might that be Yamashita-san walking over there?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>こんな<ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>きなアパートは<ruby><rb>一人</rb><rt>ひとり</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>暮</rb><rt>ぐ</rt></ruby>らしにはちょっとぜいたくではないか。</span>／<span class="translation">Isn’t such a big apartment a little too luxurious for someone who lives alone?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>もしかしたら、<ruby><rb>和子</rb><rt>かず こ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>本当</rb><rt>ほん  とう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>良雄</rb><rt>よし お</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>好</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>きなのではないか。</span>／<span class="translation">Isn’t it possible that Kazuko is really in love with Yoshio?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>この<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はなし</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>結局</rb><rt>けっ きょく</rt></ruby>ハッピーエンドになるのではないか。</span>／<span class="translation">It looks like this story might just wind up with a happy ending.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>ファーストフード<ruby><rb>産業</rb><rt>さん ぎょう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>伸</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>びれば<ruby><rb>伸</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>びるほどごみも<ruby><rb>増</rb><rt>ふ</rt></ruby>えるのではないか。</span>／<span class="translation">As the fast food industry gets bigger and bigger, won’t that just create more trash?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span>この<ruby><rb>品質</rb><rt>ひん しつ</rt></ruby>でこの<ruby><rb>値段</rb><rt>ね だん</rt></ruby>は、ちょっと<ruby><rb>高</rb><rt>たか</rt></ruby>いのではないか。</span>／<span class="translation">Isn’t this price a little steep for something of this quality?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（7）</span>これからますます<ruby><rb>環境</rb><rt>かん きょう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>問題</rb><rt>もん だい</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>重要</rb><rt>じゅう よう</rt></ruby>になるのではないか。</span>／<span class="translation">Won’t environmental problems become even more and more serious from now on?</span></div><div class="explanation">Attached to expressions in the plain form, this expresses a conjecture on the part of the speaker, with the sense of “I can’t say for certain, but isn’t it likely that....” The speaker’s degree of conviction is lower than in the case of だろう.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x44123"><span class="number">2. </span>...（の）ではないかとおもう</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>こんなうまい<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はなし</rt></ruby>は、うそではないかと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>う。</span>／<span class="translation">I have a hard time believing such a good deal to be true.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>どちらかというと<ruby><rb>妹</rb><rt>いもうと</rt></ruby>さんの<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>ほう</rt></ruby>がきれいなのではないかと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>う。</span>／<span class="translation">If I had to say, I think the younger sister is probably the prettier of the two. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はなし</rt></ruby>がうますぎるので、<ruby><rb>山田</rb><rt>やま だ</rt></ruby>さんは、これは<ruby><rb>詐欺</rb><rt>さ ぎ</rt></ruby>ではないかと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>ったんだそうです。</span>／<span class="translation">The deal was too good to be true, so apparently Yamada-san thought it was most likely a scam.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>もしかすると、<ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>はこの<ruby><rb>秘密</rb><rt>ひ みつ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>っているのではないかと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>う。</span>／<span class="translation">I think that there’s a good chance she might know the secret.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>この<ruby><rb>条件</rb><rt>じょう けん</rt></ruby>はわれわれにとって<ruby><rb>不利</rb><rt>ふ り</rt></ruby>ではないかと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>われる。</span>／<span class="translation">This condition might possibly work to our detriment.</span></div><div class="explanation">This construction is formed by attaching 思う to ではないか. When the dictionary form 思う is used, it always expresses the speaker’s judgment; when 思った is used, as in (3), the judgment of a third-person subject can be expressed. The form 思われる, which is used in (5), has the tone of written language. This form is often used for the purpose of softening what would otherwise sound like a strong or dogmatic opinion; it does not necessarily mean that the speaker is in doubt of something.</div></body></html>