<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ないかしら</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0645.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ないか】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0647.xhtml">【ないかな】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x60329">【ないかしら】</h1><div class="explanation">The ないかしら pattern consists of the negative form of an inflected word combined with かしら, which expresses a sense of uncertainty on the part of the speaker. It is used for both self-addressed questions and questions addressed to an interlocutor. In the past, ないかしら was conventionally used by female speakers. However, now it is infrequent, and ないかな is used instead.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x60344"><span class="number">1. </span>...ないかしら〈wish, desire〉</h2><h4 class="info">［V-ない／V-れない  かしら］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-てくれないかしら］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>またあの<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>手紙</rb><rt>て がみ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>ないかしら。</span>／<span class="translation">I do hope I will receive a letter from him again.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>お<ruby><rb>金持</rb><rt>かね も</rt></ruby>ちと<ruby><rb>結婚</rb><rt>けっ こん</rt></ruby>できないかしら。</span>／<span class="translation">I wish I could marry a rich man.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>バス、すぐに<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>てくれないかしら。</span>／<span class="translation">I do hope the bus comes soon.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>ちょっと<ruby><rb>手伝</rb><rt>て つだ</rt></ruby>ってくれないかしら。</span>／<span class="translation">I wonder if you could help me for a moment.</span></div><div class="explanation">When ないかしら is used with the negative form of an action verb, the negative form of the potential V-れる, or the pattern V-てくれない, it expresses the speaker’s hope or desire. When a sentence like (4) is directly addressed to a listener, it can be understood as a request from the speaker.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x60388"><span class="number">2. </span>...ないかしら〈conjecture, concern〉</h2><h4 class="info">［N／Na　ではないかしら］</h4><h4 class="info">［A-くないかしら］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-ないかしら］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>向</rb><rt>む</rt></ruby>こうからくる<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>鈴木</rb><rt>すず き</rt></ruby>さんじゃないかしら。</span>／<span class="translation">Could that be Suzuki-san over there, walking this way?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>この<ruby><rb>着物</rb><rt>き もの</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>にはちょっと<ruby><rb>派手</rb><rt>は で</rt></ruby>じゃないかしら。</span>／<span class="translation">I wonder if this <i>kimono</i> is a little too showy for me.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>このご<ruby><rb>飯</rb><rt>はん</rt></ruby>、ちょっとかたくないかしら。</span>／<span class="translation">I wonder if this rice isn’t a bit undercooked.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>あんなに<ruby><rb>乱暴</rb><rt>らん ぼう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>扱</rb><rt>あつか</rt></ruby>ったらこわれないかしら。</span>／<span class="translation">I wonder if it might not break if it’s handled so roughly.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses a conjecture, as in “I’m not absolutely sure, but it just might be so,” or a feeling of anxiety or concern, as in “I have the sense that/I’m worried about....” If the speaker is talking to <span class="noSeparate">him/her</span>self, ないかしら functions as a self-addressed question, but if this expression is used to address a listener, it means “Don’t you think so?” and functions as an appeal for the listener’s judgment.</div></body></html>