<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ことはならない</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0233.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ことはない】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0235.xhtml">【このたび】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x18398">【ことはならない】</h1><h4 class="info">［V ことはならない］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>だめだ。あんな<ruby><rb>男</rb><rt>おとこ</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>結婚</rb><rt>けっ こん</rt></ruby>することはならない。おまえはだまされているんだ。おとうさんはぜったいにゆるさない。</span>／<span class="translation">No. I won’t allow you to marry such a man. You have been deceived. I (your father) will never allow it. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>戦前</rb><rt>せん ぜん</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>天皇</rb><rt>てん のう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>写真</rb><rt>しゃ しん</rt></ruby>でさえ<ruby><rb>顔</rb><rt>かお</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>げて<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>ることはならないとされていた。</span>／<span class="translation">Before the war, it was prohibited to look directly at even a picture of the Emperor. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>こどものころ、<ruby><rb>本</rb><rt>ほん</rt></ruby>や<ruby><rb>新聞</rb><rt>しん ぶん</rt></ruby>をまたぐことはならぬとよくおじいさんにしかられたものだ。</span>／<span class="translation">When I was a child, my grandfather often scolded me not to step over books or newspapers. </span></div><div class="explanation">Has the meaning of prohibition, as in “you shouldn’t do....” Also takes the form ならぬ, as in (3). An old-fashioned expression. </div></body></html>