<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>べし</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0919.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【べく】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0921.xhtml">【へた】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x85298">【べし】</h1><h4 class="info">［V-るべし］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>学生</rb><rt>がく せい</rt></ruby>はすべからく<ruby><rb>勉強</rb><rt>べん きょう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>励</rb><rt>はげ</rt></ruby>むべし。</span>／<span class="translation">Students should apply themselves to their studies.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>後生</rb><rt>こう せい</rt></ruby>おそるべし。</span>／<span class="translation">The next generation carries our hopes.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>今度</rb><rt>こん ど</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>試験</rb><rt>し けん</rt></ruby>は、よほど<ruby><rb>難</rb><rt>むずか</rt></ruby>しかったらしく、クラスで<ruby><rb>一番</rb><rt>いち ばん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>良</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>くできる<ruby><rb>生徒</rb><rt>せい と</rt></ruby>でも 60 <ruby><rb>点</rb><rt>てん</rt></ruby>しかとれなかった。<ruby><rb>後</rb><rt>あと</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>推</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>して<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>るべしだ。</span>／<span class="translation">The recent examination must have been very difficult because even the brightest student in the class got only sixty points. You can imagine how the rest of the class did.</span></div><div class="explanation">An expression used in the classical written language, rarely used in modern language except in idioms. Expresses a command with the meaning of “ought to do ... as a matter of course” or “it is appropriate to do ....”</div><div class="explanation">(1) takes the form of すべからく...べし and in this context it means, “It’s a matter of course that students must study, so study!”</div><div class="explanation">(2) is an idiom meaning, “Young people have great potential and therefore they should be nurtured.”</div><div class="explanation">(3) is an idiomatic phrase meaning, “if one thinks about it, it will become apparent.” In the context of this example, it means that it goes without saying that all the rest of the students got poorer marks.</div></body></html>