<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>やっと</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part1016.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【やたらに】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part1018.xhtml">【やなんぞ】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x100393">【やっと】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x100398"><span class="number">1. </span>やっと〈realization of expectations〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>三回</rb><rt>さん かい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>試験</rb><rt>し けん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>受</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>けて、やっと<ruby><rb>合格</rb><rt>ごう かく</rt></ruby>した。</span>／<span class="translation">On my third attempt, I finally passed the exam.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>テストもやっと<ruby><rb>終</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>わった。</span>／<span class="translation">The tests are also finally over.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>何日</rb><rt>なん にち</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>練習</rb><rt>れん しゅう</rt></ruby>してやっとできるようになった。</span>／<span class="translation">I practiced for days and finally became able to do it.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>やっと、<ruby><rb>退院</rb><rt>たい いん</rt></ruby>できるところまで<ruby><rb>快復</rb><rt>かい ふく</rt></ruby>した。</span>／<span class="translation">At last I recovered enough to leave the hospital.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>1995 <ruby><rb>年</rb><rt>ねん</rt></ruby>にトンネルはやっと<ruby><rb>完成</rb><rt>かん せい</rt></ruby>した。</span>／<span class="translation">The tunnel was finally completed in 1995.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span>きびしく<ruby><rb>注意</rb><rt>ちゅう い</rt></ruby>したので、<ruby><rb>孫</rb><rt>まご</rt></ruby>もやっといたずらをしなくなった。</span>／<span class="translation">Because he was harshly scolded, my grandchild finally stopped making mischief.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（7）</span><ruby><rb>明日</rb><rt>あした</rt></ruby>でやっと<ruby><rb>試験</rb><rt>し けん</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>終</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>わる。</span>／<span class="translation">Tomorrow I will finally finish the exams.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（8）</span><ruby><rb>貯金</rb><rt>ちょ きん</rt></ruby>もかなりできた。これでやっと<ruby><rb>独立</rb><rt>どく りつ</rt></ruby>できる。</span>／<span class="translation">I have some savings. With them I will finally stand on my own two feet.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（9）</span><ruby><rb>娘</rb><rt>むすめ</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>来年</rb><rt>らい ねん</rt></ruby>はやっと<ruby><rb>卒業</rb><rt>そつ ぎょう</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">My daughter will also finally graduate next year.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses a situation in which, after hard work or after a difficult time, the thing the speaker had been hoping for has been realized. Often used in the form やっとV-た. It shows the speaker’s feelings of relief or pleasure and that something took time or was difficult.</div><div class="explanation">ようやく, とうとう, and ついに are similar expressions. とうとう and ついに can be used in relation to things the speaker either desires or does not desire. However, やっと can only be used in relation to something the speaker has been hoping for.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>長い間入院していた祖父が｛とうとう／ついに｝亡くなった。／After being in the hospital for a long time, my grandfather finally passed away.</div><div class="explanation">In the above example, if やっと is used it means that the speaker has been waiting a long time for their grandfather to die. If とうとう or ついに is used, it bears no relation to whether the speaker wished for it or not but rather is a neutral expression meaning that, after a long time or journey, the final stage has been reached.</div><div class="explanation">Furthermore, as they are used in cases in which the thing the speaker had been anticipating has materialized, やっと and ようやく cannot be used when something the speaker had hoped for has not materialized in the end. </div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>彼は、｛やっと／ようやく｝来なかった。／In the end he didn’t come.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>彼は、｛とうとう／ついに｝来なかった。／In the end he didn’t come.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x100525"><span class="number">2. </span>やっと〈barely manage (to do something)〉</h2><div class="explanation">Can be used in both speaking and writing. どうにか, なんとか, かろうじて, and からくも are similar expressions. どうにか and なんとか are spoken expressions and かろうじて is a somewhat formal written expression. からくも is a formal written expression. For details of how this differs from かろうじて, refer to かろうじて (Usage 1).</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x100538"><span class="number">a. </span>やっとV-た</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>タクシーをとばして、やっと<ruby><rb>約束</rb><rt>やく そく</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>間</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>合</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>った。</span>／<span class="translation">Having raced there in a taxi, I just made my appointment on time.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>試合</rb><rt>し あい</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>延長戦</rb><rt>えん ちょう せん</rt></ruby>にもつれこんだが、<ruby><rb>全力</rb><rt>ぜん りょく</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>振</rb><rt>ふ</rt></ruby>り<ruby><rb>絞</rb><rt>しぼ</rt></ruby>ってやっと<ruby><rb>勝</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>った。</span>／<span class="translation">The game went into extra innings, but mustering all their strength, they finally won.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>うちの<ruby><rb>子</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>先月</rb><rt>せん げつ</rt></ruby>やっと<ruby><rb>二才</rb><rt>に さい</rt></ruby>になったばかりだ。</span>／<span class="translation">My child just turned two last month.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>出発</rb><rt>しゅっ ぱつ</rt></ruby>してから、まだやっと<ruby><rb>三日</rb><rt>みっか</rt></ruby>しかたっていない。</span>／<span class="translation">Still only three days have passed since he left.</span></div><div class="explanation">As in examples (1) and (2), used in cases where something was difficult, but through the application of effort or through the endurance of hardship, things came out well in the end. As in (3) and (4), when used with expressions of quantity, demonstrates that that quantity is the utmost, that there is no more than that, and that the quantity is small. Here, (3) means “to just reach the age of two (very young)” and (4) means “merely three days.”</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x100574"><span class="number">b. </span>やっとV-ている</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>退職</rb><rt>たい しょく</rt></ruby>してからは、<ruby><rb>国</rb><rt>くに</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>支払</rb><rt>し はら</rt></ruby>われる<ruby><rb>年金</rb><rt>ねん きん</rt></ruby>で、やっと<ruby><rb>生活</rb><rt>せい かつ</rt></ruby>している。</span>／<span class="translation">I can just get by on the pension I get from the state after retiring.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>太</rb><rt>ふと</rt></ruby>りやすい<ruby><rb>体質</rb><rt>たい しつ</rt></ruby>で、ダイエットをしてやっと<ruby><rb>現在</rb><rt>げん ざい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>体重</rb><rt>たい じゅう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>維持</rb><rt>い じ</rt></ruby>している。</span>／<span class="translation">I put on weight easily and have to diet just to maintain my current weight.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>人工</rb><rt>じん こう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>呼吸器</rb><rt>こ きゅう き</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>使</rb><rt>つか</rt></ruby>って、やっと<ruby><rb>生</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>きている<ruby><rb>状態</rb><rt>じょう たい</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">The use of an artificial respirator is only just keeping <span class="noSeparate">him/her</span> alive.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>一面</rb><rt>いち めん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>焼</rb><rt>や</rt></ruby>け<ruby><rb>野原</rb><rt>の はら</rt></ruby>で、<ruby><rb>焼</rb><rt>や</rt></ruby>け<ruby><rb>残</rb><rt>のこ</rt></ruby>った<ruby><rb>家</rb><rt>いえ</rt></ruby>も、<ruby><rb>燃</rb><rt>も</rt></ruby>え<ruby><rb>残</rb><rt>のこ</rt></ruby>った<ruby><rb>柱</rb><rt>はしら</rt></ruby>のおかげで、やっと<ruby><rb>立</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>っているというありさまだった。</span>／<span class="translation">In the burned-out ruins, the shell of the house was barely standing owing to the burnt remains of the pillars.</span></div><div class="explanation">As in examples (1) and (2), can be used in cases where “(it) is not enough but, through hardship, the current situation can be maintained.” As in (3) and (4), also used in cases where the worst situation (death or ruin) is one step away but, somehow, the current situation is maintained.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x100610"><span class="number">c. </span>やっとV-るN</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>家</rb><rt>いえ</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>家族</rb><rt>か ぞく</rt></ruby>5<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>にん</rt></ruby>がやっと<ruby><rb>暮</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>らせる<ruby><rb>広</rb><rt>ひろ</rt></ruby>さしかない。</span>／<span class="translation">In my house there is just barely the room for the five members of my family to manage to live.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>柿</rb><rt>かき</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>実</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>大人</rb><rt>おとな</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>背伸</rb><rt>せ の</rt></ruby>びをしてやっと<ruby><rb>届</rb><rt>とど</rt></ruby>くところにあった。</span>／<span class="translation">The persimmons were on high branches that an adult on tiptoe could just reach.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>何年</rb><rt>なん ねん</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>英語</rb><rt>えい ご</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>勉強</rb><rt>べん きょう</rt></ruby>しているが、やさしい<ruby><rb>本</rb><rt>ほん</rt></ruby>がやっと<ruby><rb>読</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>める<ruby><rb>程度</rb><rt>てい ど</rt></ruby>で、<ruby><rb>新聞</rb><rt>しん ぶん</rt></ruby>なんかとても<ruby><rb>読</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>めない。</span>／<span class="translation">I’ve been studying English for many years and can just manage to read a simple book, but there is no way I could read something like a newspaper.</span></div><div class="explanation">Indicates “N that is achievable to the degree of やっと／なんとか／どうにか...できる.” Shows that “(something) is difficult but can somehow just be done.” Used with expressions of possibility. </div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x100641"><span class="number">d. </span>やっとNだ</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>宿題</rb><rt>しゅく だい</rt></ruby>はなかなか<ruby><rb>終</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>わらない。まだやっと<ruby><rb>半分</rb><rt>はん ぶん</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">It is taking a long time to finish my homework. I’ve still got half of it to do.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>この<ruby><rb>本</rb><rt>ほん</rt></ruby>はすごく<ruby><rb>難</rb><rt>むずか</rt></ruby>しくて、なかなか<ruby><rb>進</rb><rt>すす</rt></ruby>まない。<ruby><rb>三時間</rb><rt>さん じ かん</rt></ruby>かかって、やっと5ページだ。</span>／<span class="translation">This book is really difficult and I’m not making much progress with it. It’s taken me three hours to read just five pages.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>収入</rb><rt>しゅう にゅう</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なに</rt></ruby>もかも<ruby><rb>全部</rb><rt>ぜん ぶ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>含</rb><rt>ふく</rt></ruby>めても、やっと 10 <ruby><rb>万</rb><rt>まん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>円</rb><rt>えん</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">If I put all my income together, it just comes to 100,000 yen.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>娘</rb><rt>むすめ</rt></ruby>は、まだやっと 18 <ruby><rb>才</rb><rt>さい</rt></ruby>だ。<ruby><rb>結婚</rb><rt>けっ こん</rt></ruby>なんかとんでもない。</span>／<span class="translation">My daughter is still just eighteen years old. Things like marriage are unthinkable.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>うちの<ruby><rb>子</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>は、まだやっと<ruby><rb>幼稚園</rb><rt>よう ち えん</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">My child is still only in kindergarten.</span></div><div class="explanation">As in examples (1)-(3), used with expressions of quantity, shows that that quantity has been reached after tremendous efforts. Used in cases where the speaker thinks that the quantity is not proportionate to the effort put in. Also, used with expressions of age or school year as in (4) and (5), means “no more than...” or “very young/immature.”</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x100683"><span class="number">e. </span>やっとのN</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>戦争中</rb><rt>せん そう ちゅう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>毎日</rb><rt>まい にち</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べていくのがやっとの<ruby><rb>生活</rb><rt>せい かつ</rt></ruby>だった。</span>／<span class="translation">During the war, it was all one could do to eat every day.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>日常</rb><rt>にち じょう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>会話</rb><rt>かい わ</rt></ruby>がやっとの<ruby><rb>語学力</rb><rt>ご がく りょく</rt></ruby>では、<ruby><rb>大学</rb><rt>だい がく</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>授業</rb><rt>じゅ ぎょう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>受</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>けるのは<ruby><rb>難</rb><rt>むずか</rt></ruby>しいだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">If everyday conversation is the limit of your language ability, it will probably be difficult for you to take university classes.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>やっとの<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>いで、<ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>秘密</rb><rt>ひ みつ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>打</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>ち<ruby><rb>明</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>けた。</span>／<span class="translation">After agonizing over it, he told her his secret at last.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>やっとのことで、<ruby><rb>一戸建</rb><rt>いっ こ だ</rt></ruby>ての<ruby><rb>家</rb><rt>いえ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>手</rb><rt>て</rt></ruby>にいれた。</span>／<span class="translation">At long last I got my own house.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used in the forms ...するのがやっとのN and NがやっとのN, means “doing something with all one’s might, there is no scope beyond that effort.” Also, the やっとの思いで and やっとのことで of (3) and (4) are idiomatic expressions meaning “after going to great trouble/putting in great effort.”</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x100720"><span class="number">f. </span>Nが／...のが　やっとだ</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>家</rb><rt>いえ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>前</rb><rt>まえ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>道</rb><rt>みち</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>車</rb><rt>くるま</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>一台</rb><rt>いち だい</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>通</rb><rt>とお</rt></ruby>るのがやっとだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Just a single car can pass along the road in front of my house (as the road is narrow). </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>給料</rb><rt>きゅう りょう</rt></ruby>では、<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べていくのがやっとだ。</span>／<span class="translation">On my wages, all I can afford is to put food on the table every day.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>頃</rb><rt>ころ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>体力</rb><rt>たい りょく</rt></ruby>がなくて、<ruby><rb>毎日</rb><rt>まい にち</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>学校</rb><rt>がっ こう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>通</rb><rt>かよ</rt></ruby>うのがやっとだった。</span>／<span class="translation">In my childhood I was physically weak and it was all I could do to get to school and back.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>この<ruby><rb>本</rb><rt>ほん</rt></ruby>はすごく<ruby><rb>難</rb><rt>むずか</rt></ruby>しくて、なかなか<ruby><rb>進</rb><rt>すす</rt></ruby>まない。<ruby><rb>一日</rb><rt>いち にち</rt></ruby>に5ページがやっとだ。</span>／<span class="translation">This book is very difficult and I’m making little progress. I can only read five pages a day.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “to do (something) with all one’s might with no scope beyond that.”</div></body></html>