<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ても</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0495.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【てみる】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0497.xhtml">【でも<sub class="variation">1</sub>】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x44874">【ても】</h1><h4 class="info">［N／Na　でも］</h4><h4 class="info">［A-くても］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-ても］</h4><div class="explanation">A combination of the <i>te</i>-form of a predicate and も. For nouns and <i>na</i>-adjectives, it becomes でも. In informal spoken language, the forms たって and だって are also used.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x44901"><span class="number">1. </span>...ても〈converse condition〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>この<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>病気</rb><rt>びょう き</rt></ruby>でも<ruby><rb>休</rb><rt>やす</rt></ruby>めない。</span>／<span class="translation">I can’t take time off from this job even if I get sick.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>その<ruby><rb>車</rb><rt>くるま</rt></ruby>がたとえ 10 <ruby><rb>万</rb><rt>まん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>円</rb><rt>えん</rt></ruby>でも、<ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>えない。</span>／<span class="translation">Even if that car cost only 100,000 yen, I’m not in a position to buy it now.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>不便</rb><rt>ふ べん</rt></ruby>でも、<ruby><rb>慣</rb><rt>な</rt></ruby>れた<ruby><rb>機械</rb><rt>き かい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>ほう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>使</rb><rt>つか</rt></ruby>いやすい。</span>／<span class="translation">It’s easier to use a machine that you’re used to, even if it’s a little inconvenient.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>風</rb><rt>かぜ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>冷</rb><rt>つめ</rt></ruby>たくても<ruby><rb>平気</rb><rt>へい き</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">Even if the wind is cold, it doesn’t bother me.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>ほしくなくても、<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べなければいけない。</span>／<span class="translation">Even if you don’t want to, you have to eat something.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>国</rb><rt>くに</rt></ruby>へ<ruby><rb>帰</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>っても、ここの<ruby><rb>人々</rb><rt>ひと びと</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>親切</rb><rt>しん せつ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>忘</rb><rt>わす</rt></ruby>れないだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">Even after I return home, I don’t think I’ll ever forget the kindness of the people here.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（7）</span><ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>すぐできなくても、がっかりする<ruby><rb>必要</rb><rt>ひつ よう</rt></ruby>はない。</span>／<span class="translation">You don’t have to be discouraged if you can’t do it right away.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（8）</span>わたしは、まだ<ruby><rb>勉強</rb><rt>べん きょう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>不足</rb><rt>ぶ そく</rt></ruby>だから、<ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>試験</rb><rt>し けん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>受</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>けても<ruby><rb>受</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>からないだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">I still haven’t studied enough, so if I took the test now, I doubt I’d pass.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（9）</span>たとえ<ruby><rb>両親</rb><rt>りょう しん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>反対</rb><rt>はん たい</rt></ruby>されても<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>との<ruby><rb>結婚</rb><rt>けっ こん</rt></ruby>はあきらめない。</span>／<span class="translation">Even if my parents are against it, I’m not going to give up on marrying him.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses a converse condition that negates the resultative conditional “If X happens, then Y results” (XならばY). For example, the ...ても constructions in (1) and (6), respectively, negate the relationship between the conditions “If I get sick, I can take time off” and “After I return home, I’ll forget the kindness of the people here”; these express that even if condition X arises, condition Y will not result. Example (9) shows how the adverb たとえ is sometimes used with this construction.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x44971"><span class="number">2. </span>...ても〈parallel condition〉</h2><div class="explanation">Presents two or more conditions and expresses that no matter which condition is realized, the outcome will be the same.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x44984"><span class="number">a. </span>...ても</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>2を<ruby><rb>二乗</rb><rt>に じょう</rt></ruby>すると4になりますが、－2を<ruby><rb>二乗</rb><rt>に じょう</rt></ruby>しても4になります。</span>／<span class="translation">If you square 2 you get 4, and if you square minus 2 you also get 4.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>飛行機</rb><rt>ひ こう き</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>くと<ruby><rb>料金</rb><rt>りょう きん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>片道</rb><rt>かた みち</rt></ruby>2<ruby><rb>万</rb><rt>まん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>円</rb><rt>えん</rt></ruby>ぐらいですが、<ruby><rb>新幹線</rb><rt>しん かん せん</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>っても<ruby><rb>費用</rb><rt>ひ よう</rt></ruby>はだいたい<ruby><rb>同</rb><rt>おな</rt></ruby>じです。</span>／<span class="translation">The fare for a one-way plane ticket is about 20,000 yen, but going by <i>s</i><i>hinkansen</i><i> </i>(bullet train) costs about the same.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>演奏会</rb><rt>えん そう かい</rt></ruby>、あと 20 <ruby><rb>分</rb><rt>ぷん</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>始</rb><rt>はじ</rt></ruby>まるんですが、タクシーで<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>けば<ruby><rb>間</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>合</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>うでしょうか。</span>／<span class="translation">The concert starts in about twenty minutes—can I still make it if I take a taxi?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span><ruby><rb>会場</rb><rt>かい じょう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>駅</rb><rt>えき</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>近</rb><rt>ちか</rt></ruby>くですから、<ruby><rb>歩</rb><rt>ある</rt></ruby>いて<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>っても<ruby><rb>間</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>合</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>うと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>いますよ。</span>／<span class="translation">The hall is near the station, so I think you can make it in time even if you walk.</span></div><div class="explanation">When two clauses expressing different conditions that yield the same outcome are presented sequentially, as in XならばZ and YならばZ, the second conditional clause is expressed with ても, in the form Y（であっ）てもZ. Since this construction conveys the meaning that either condition will yield the same result, it can be rephrased as XてもYてもZ.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>2を二乗しても、－2を二乗しても4になります。／Either squaring 2 or squaring minus 2 will yield 4.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x45043"><span class="number">b. </span>...ても...ても</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>うちの<ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>はニンジンでもピーマンでも<ruby><rb>好</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>嫌</rb><rt>きら</rt></ruby>いを<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>わないで<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べます。</span>／<span class="translation">Our child isn’t picky—she’ll eat carrots and green peppers and everything.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>天気</rb><rt>てん き</rt></ruby>がよくても<ruby><rb>悪</rb><rt>わる</rt></ruby>くても、<ruby><rb>雨</rb><rt>あめ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>降</rb><rt>ふ</rt></ruby>っても<ruby><rb>風</rb><rt>かぜ</rt></ruby>がふいても、<ruby><rb>新聞</rb><rt>しん ぶん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>配達</rb><rt>はいたつ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>休</rb><rt>やす</rt></ruby>めない。</span>／<span class="translation">Whether the weather is good or bad, whether the rain falls or the wind blows, delivering newspapers is a job that doesn’t allow for holidays.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>道</rb><rt>みち</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>歩</rb><rt>ある</rt></ruby>いてもデパートへ<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>はい</rt></ruby>っても<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>でいっぱいだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Whether I walked on the streets or went into department stores, there were crowds of people everywhere.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>辞書</rb><rt>じ しょ</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>調</rb><rt>しら</rt></ruby>べても<ruby><rb>先生</rb><rt>せん せい</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>聞</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>いても、まだこの<ruby><rb>文</rb><rt>ぶん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>意味</rb><rt>い み</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>理解</rb><rt>り かい</rt></ruby>できない。</span>／<span class="translation">Even after consulting my dictionary and asking my teacher, I still don’t understand what this sentence means.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>スポーツをしても<ruby><rb>映画</rb><rt>えい が</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>ても<ruby><rb>気</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>晴</rb><rt>は</rt></ruby>れない。</span>／<span class="translation">Even playing sports or watching movies doesn’t lift my spirits.</span></div><div class="explanation">The construction XてもYても (...ても) Z juxtaposes two (or more) conditions and conveys the meaning that either (or any) one of them will yield the same result.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x45086"><span class="number">c. </span>V-てもV-なくても</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>今回</rb><rt>こん かい</rt></ruby>のレポートは<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>だ</rt></ruby>しても<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>だ</rt></ruby>さなくても、<ruby><rb>成績</rb><rt>せい せき</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>全</rb><rt>まった</rt></ruby>く<ruby><rb>影響</rb><rt>えい きょう</rt></ruby>ありません。</span>／<span class="translation">Your grade will not be affected at all, regardless of whether or not you submit this report.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>全員</rb><rt>ぜん いん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>参加</rb><rt>さん か</rt></ruby>してもしなくても、<ruby><rb>一応</rb><rt>いち おう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>人数分</rb><rt>にんずうぶん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>席</rb><rt>せき</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>確保</rb><rt>かく ほ</rt></ruby>しておきます。</span>／<span class="translation">Whether everyone comes or not, I will at least make sure there are enough seats for all the members.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>1<ruby><rb>日</rb><rt>にち</rt></ruby>ぐらいなら<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べても<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べなくても<ruby><rb>体重</rb><rt>たい じゅう</rt></ruby>はたいして<ruby><rb>変化</rb><rt>へん か</rt></ruby>しない。</span>／<span class="translation">Eating or not eating for just one day won’t change your weight that much.</span></div><div class="explanation">In forms like ...してもしなくても, this juxtaposes an affirmative condition with a negative one to express the idea that, whichever the case, the outcome will not change.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x45117"><span class="number">d. </span>V-てもV-ても</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>このズボンは<ruby><rb>洗</rb><rt>あら</rt></ruby>っても<ruby><rb>洗</rb><rt>あら</rt></ruby>っても<ruby><rb>汚</rb><rt>よご</rt></ruby>れが<ruby><rb>落</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>ちない。</span>／<span class="translation">I’ve washed and washed these pants but still can’t get them clean.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>宿題</rb><rt>しゅく だい</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>多</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>すぎて、やってもやっても<ruby><rb>終</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>わらない。</span>／<span class="translation">I have so much homework that even though I work and work I’m still never finished.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>働</rb><rt>はたら</rt></ruby>いても<ruby><rb>働</rb><rt>はたら</rt></ruby>いても、<ruby><rb>暮</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>らしは<ruby><rb>全然</rb><rt>ぜん ぜん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>楽</rb><rt>らく</rt></ruby>にならない。</span>／<span class="translation">No matter how hard I work, it never gets easier to make a living.</span></div><div class="explanation">The same verb is repeated in order to emphasize that, no matter how much effort one makes, the desired outcome cannot be obtained. Although the final clause is usually a negative expression, there are cases, as shown below, when an affirmative expression may follow. Even in these cases, however, the implication is that the outcome is undesirable.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>追い払っても追い払ってもついてくる。／No matter how often I chase it away, it keeps on following me.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>雑草は取っても取ってもすぐ生えてくる。／I weed and weed, but they grow back in no time at all.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x45166"><span class="number">3. </span><ruby><rb>疑</rb><rt>ぎ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>問</rb><rt>もん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>詞</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>...ても</h2><div class="explanation">When question words such as 何, どこ, だれ, どれ, いつ, and どう are used with a ても conditional, the meaning is that, no matter what the condition is, the resulting situation is inevitable. (When a negative form follows, it means that the situation will fail to occur.)</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x45179"><span class="number">a. </span>いくら...ても</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>いくら<ruby><rb>華</rb><rt>はな</rt></ruby>やかな<ruby><rb>職業</rb><rt>しょく ぎょう</rt></ruby>でも、つらいことはたくさんある。</span>／<span class="translation">No matter how spectacular the occupation, there will be many difficult challenges.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>いくら<ruby><rb>高</rb><rt>たか</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>車</rb><rt>くるま</rt></ruby>でも、<ruby><rb>使</rb><rt>つか</rt></ruby>わなかったら<ruby><rb>宝</rb><rt>たから</rt></ruby>のもちぐされだ。</span>／<span class="translation">However expensive a car may be, if you don’t use it, it’s a waste of a valuable possession.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>給料</rb><rt>きゅう りょう</rt></ruby>がいくらよくても、<ruby><rb>休日</rb><rt>きゅう じつ</rt></ruby>のない<ruby><rb>職場</rb><rt>しょく ば</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>きたくない。</span>／<span class="translation">No matter how good the salary is, I don’t want to work at a place where there are no days off.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>いくら<ruby><rb>騒</rb><rt>さわ</rt></ruby>いでも、ここは<ruby><rb>森</rb><rt>もり</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>中</rb><rt>なか</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>一軒家</rb><rt>いっ けん や</rt></ruby>だから<ruby><rb>大丈夫</rb><rt>だい じょう ぶ</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">This is the only house in the middle of a forest, so you can make as much noise as you want.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>いくらお<ruby><rb>金</rb><rt>かね</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>貰</rb><rt>もら</rt></ruby>っても、この<ruby><rb>絵</rb><rt>え</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>絶対</rb><rt>ぜっ たい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>手放</rb><rt>て ばな</rt></ruby>せない。</span>／<span class="translation">No matter how much money I might get for it, I’ll never give up this picture.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span>このビデオの<ruby><rb>会話</rb><rt>かい わ</rt></ruby>は、いくら<ruby><rb>聞</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>いてもよく<ruby><rb>分</rb><rt>わ</rt></ruby>からない。</span>／<span class="translation">I can’t understand the conversation on this video, no matter how many times I listen to it.</span></div><div class="explanation">いくらXても expresses that the frequency or degree of an action or situation is very great. Used to say that, although this is a powerful condition, it has no effect on the realization of a outcome.</div><div class="explanation">The outcome is usually contrary to anticipation or expectation. For example, in (1), the expectation that “If you have a spectacular occupation, it must always be enjoyable” is contradicted by the second clause “...there will be many difficult challenges.” In (6), the resulting situation is “I still don’t understand,” which runs counter to the expected outcome “If I listen to this video many times, I should be able to understand it.”</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x45238"><span class="number">b. </span>どんなに...ても</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>このコンピューターはどんなに<ruby><rb>複雑</rb><rt>ふく ざつ</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>問題</rb><rt>もん だい</rt></ruby>でも<ruby><rb>解</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>いてしまう。</span>／<span class="translation">This computer can solve any problem, no matter how complex.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>どんなにつらくても<ruby><rb>頑張</rb><rt>がん ば</rt></ruby>ろう。</span>／<span class="translation">I will keep on trying, no matter how hard it gets.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>どんなに<ruby><rb>熱心</rb><rt>ねっ しん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>誘</rb><rt>さそ</rt></ruby>われても、<ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>はプロの<ruby><rb>歌手</rb><rt>か しゅ</rt></ruby>にはなりたくなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">No matter how fervently she was scouted, she did not want to become a professional singer.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>どんなに<ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>きい<ruby><rb>地震</rb><rt>じ しん</rt></ruby>がきても、この<ruby><rb>建物</rb><rt>たて もの</rt></ruby>なら<ruby><rb>大丈夫</rb><rt>だい じょう ぶ</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">No matter how big an earthquake may hit, this building is safe.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>妻</rb><rt>つま</rt></ruby>はわたしがどんなに<ruby><rb>怒</rb><rt>おこ</rt></ruby>っても<ruby><rb>平気</rb><rt>へい き</rt></ruby>である。</span>／<span class="translation">My wife stays calm, no matter how angry I get.</span></div><div class="explanation">Usage is the same as いくら...ても (Usage a) above. どんなに can be replaced by いくら, but the latter is more conversational.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x45281"><span class="number">c. </span><ruby><rb>疑</rb><rt>ぎ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>問</rb><rt>もん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>詞</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>...ても</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>だれが<ruby><rb>電話</rb><rt>でん わ</rt></ruby>して<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>ても、<ruby><rb>取</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>りつがないでください。</span>／<span class="translation">No matter who calls, please don’t put them through.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>どんな<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>でも、<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>快</rb><rt>こころよ</rt></ruby>く<ruby><rb>引</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>受</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>けてくれる。</span>／<span class="translation">He readily agrees to do any kind of work.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>本</rb><rt>ほん</rt></ruby>は、どこで<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>っても<ruby><rb>同</rb><rt>おな</rt></ruby>じ<ruby><rb>値段</rb><rt>ね だん</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">Books are the same price wherever you buy them.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>あの<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>はいつ<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>ても<ruby><rb>美</rb><rt>うつく</rt></ruby>しい。</span>／<span class="translation">She’s beautiful no matter when you see her.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なに</rt></ruby>をしても、あのショックが<ruby><rb>忘</rb><rt>わす</rt></ruby>れられない。</span>／<span class="translation">Whatever I do, I can’t forget the shock I felt.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means どのような場合でもY (no matter what the situation is, Y holds true). No matter what element is linked to the question word, this expresses that the end result will always be situation Y (or, in the case of a negative form, that it will always fail to be Y).</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x45324"><span class="number">d. </span>どうV-ても</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>どう<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ってみても、<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>決心</rb><rt>けっ しん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>変</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>えさせることはできなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">No matter how I put it, I couldn’t find a way to make him change his mind.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>どう<ruby><rb>計算</rb><rt>けい さん</rt></ruby>してみても、そこへ<ruby><rb>着</rb><rt>つ</rt></ruby>くまで 10 <ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby>はかかる。</span>／<span class="translation">No matter how you calculate, it’s going to take ten hours to get there.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>どうがんばっても、<ruby><rb>前</rb><rt>まえ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>走</rb><rt>はし</rt></ruby>っている<ruby><rb>三人</rb><rt>さん にん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>追</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>抜</rb><rt>ぬ</rt></ruby>くのは<ruby><rb>無理</rb><rt>む り</rt></ruby>だと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>った。</span>／<span class="translation">I thought that, no matter how hard I tried, it was going to be impossible for me to overtake the three runners in front.</span></div><div class="explanation">Uses a verb of intentional action to express that, no matter what measures are taken, the outcome will not meet one’s expectations.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x45355"><span class="number">e. </span>なん+<ruby><rb>助</rb><rt>じょ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>数</rb><rt>すう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>詞</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>+V-ても</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>何回</rb><rt>なん かい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>聞</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>いても<ruby><rb>名前</rb><rt>な まえ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>覚</rb><rt>おぼ</rt></ruby>えられない。</span>／<span class="translation">However many times I hear them, I can’t remember names.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>この<ruby><rb>論文</rb><rt>ろん ぶん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>何度</rb><rt>なん ど</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>読</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>み<ruby><rb>返</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>しても、<ruby><rb>理解</rb><rt>り かい</rt></ruby>できない。</span>／<span class="translation">No matter how many times I re-read this paper, I can’t make sense of it.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>何回</rb><rt>なん かい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はな</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>合</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>っても、この<ruby><rb>問題</rb><rt>もん だい</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>簡単</rb><rt>かん たん</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>解決</rb><rt>かい けつ</rt></ruby>できないだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">This is not a problem that will be easily solved, no matter how many times we talk about it.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>あの<ruby><rb>店</rb><rt>みせ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>料理</rb><rt>りょう り</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>何度</rb><rt>なん ど</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べてもあきない。</span>／<span class="translation">I never get tired of the food at that restaurant, no matter how often I eat it.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>あの<ruby><rb>映画</rb><rt>えい が</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>何回</rb><rt>なん かい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>ても<ruby><rb>面白</rb><rt>おも しろ</rt></ruby>い。</span>／<span class="translation">That movie is always fun to watch.</span></div><div class="explanation">Uses an action verb to express the notion that no matter how many times the action is done, the outcome is still the same. The outcome expressed in the last part of the sentence is often contrary to expectation, as in (1)-(3). However, it can sometimes be a desirable situation, as in (4) and (5).</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x45398"><span class="number">4. </span>...ても...ただろう</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>たとえ、<ruby><rb>努力</rb><rt>ど りょく</rt></ruby>しても<ruby><rb>合格</rb><rt>ごう かく</rt></ruby>できなかっただろう。</span>／<span class="translation">I don’t think I could have passed even if I’d tried.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>頭</rb><rt>あたま</rt></ruby>がいいので、<ruby><rb>努力</rb><rt>ど りょく</rt></ruby>しなくても<ruby><rb>合格</rb><rt>ごう かく</rt></ruby>できただろう。</span>／<span class="translation">He’s really smart, so he probably could have passed without much effort.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>をだまして<ruby><rb>金儲</rb><rt>かね もう</rt></ruby>けをするような<ruby><rb>商売</rb><rt>しょう ばい</rt></ruby>では、たとえ<ruby><rb>成功</rb><rt>せい こう</rt></ruby>しても<ruby><rb>両親</rb><rt>りょう しん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>喜</rb><rt>よろこ</rt></ruby>んでくれなかっただろう。</span>／<span class="translation">In a business where you earn money by deceiving people, I doubt that my parents would have been happy for me even if I’d succeeded.</span></div><div class="explanation">This is a counter-factual conditional that negates the propositional relation XしていたらYしていただろう (if someone had done X, then <span class="noSeparate">s/he</span> probably would have done Y). In the form XしてもYしなかっただろう (even if someone had done X, <span class="noSeparate">s/he</span> probably wouldn’t have done Y), it is used to state the assumption that even if X had happened, it would have had no effect on the fact that Y did not happen.</div><div class="explanation">For example, (1) denies the conditional relationship in the resultative counter-factual conditional “If he had worked hard, then he probably would have passed” (which means he didn’t work hard and thus failed). (1) means “He did not actually work hard, but even if he had, the result probably still would have been failure.” (2) negates the resultative counter-factual conditional “If he hadn’t worked hard, then he probably wouldn’t have passed” (which means he actually did work hard and thus passed). (2) means “He did work hard, but even if he hadn’t, the result probably still would have been success.”</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x45439"><span class="number">5. </span>...ても...た</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>雨</rb><rt>あめ</rt></ruby>でも<ruby><rb>運動会</rb><rt>うん どう かい</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>おこな</rt></ruby>われた。</span>／<span class="translation">The sports meet was held even though it rained.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>頭</rb><rt>あたま</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>痛</rb><rt>いた</rt></ruby>くても<ruby><rb>学校</rb><rt>がっ こう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>休</rb><rt>やす</rt></ruby>まなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">He didn’t miss school even when he had headaches.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>ドアは<ruby><rb>強</rb><rt>つよ</rt></ruby>く<ruby><rb>押</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>しても<ruby><rb>開</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>かなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">The door wouldn’t open, even when I pushed hard on it.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>いくら<ruby><rb>待</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>っても<ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>現</rb><rt>あらわ</rt></ruby>れなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">No matter how long we waited, she didn’t show up.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>この<ruby><rb>本</rb><rt>ほん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>難</rb><rt>むずか</rt></ruby>しすぎて、<ruby><rb>辞書</rb><rt>じ しょ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>引</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby>いて<ruby><rb>読</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>んでも、ほとんど<ruby><rb>理解</rb><rt>り かい</rt></ruby>できなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">This book was too difficult—I could hardly understand any of it, even reading it with a dictionary.</span></div><div class="explanation">The construction XてもYた, which uses the <i>ta</i>-form at the end of the sentence, expresses the fact that both X and Y happened. For example, (1) means “it rained, but the sports meet was held.” While the ても form used here is similar in meaning to が, けれども, or のに, when ても is used after an action verb, it conveys the nuance that the action was repeated, or that although the action was carried out to an extreme degree, the anticipated outcome was not obtained. Thus, in sentences like (4), which include いくら, it is not possible to replace ても with が, けれども, or のに.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>いくら待った｛が／けれど／のに｝彼女は現れなかった。／We waited how long, {but/however/even though} she didn’t show up.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x45494"><span class="number">6. </span>V-てもR-きれない</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>親切</rb><rt>しん せつ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>対</rb><rt>たい</rt></ruby>しては、いくら<ruby><rb>感謝</rb><rt>かん しゃ</rt></ruby>してもしきれない。</span>／<span class="translation">I cannot thank him enough for all of his kindness.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>学生</rb><rt>がく せい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>時代</rb><rt>じ だい</rt></ruby>になぜもっと<ruby><rb>勉強</rb><rt>べん きょう</rt></ruby>しておかなかったのかと、<ruby><rb>悔</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>やんでも<ruby><rb>悔</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>やみきれない。</span>／<span class="translation">There is no limit to the regret I feel that I didn’t study harder during my school days.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>ここで<ruby><rb>負</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>けたら、<ruby><rb>死</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>んでも<ruby><rb>死</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>にきれない。</span>／<span class="translation">I can’t bear to die if we lose now.</span></div><div class="explanation">The same verb is repeated to emphasize its meaning. For example, (1) shows deep appreciation, and (2) emphasizes a strong sense of regret. This construction is rather idiomatic, and the range of verbs that can be used is limited. 死んでも死にきれない in (3) is a strong expression of being unable to give up on something or feeling deep regret.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x45525"><span class="number">7. </span>V-てもどうなるものでもない</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>いまから<ruby><rb>抗議</rb><rt>こう ぎ</rt></ruby>してもどうなるものでもない。</span>／<span class="translation">Raising an objection now won’t accomplish anything.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>もう<ruby><rb>一度</rb><rt>いち ど</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>会</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>ってもどうなるものでもないと<ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>った。</span>／<span class="translation">She concluded that even if she met with him one more time, it would still be pointless.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>性格</rb><rt>せい かく</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>直</rb><rt>なお</rt></ruby>らないのだから、あの<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>説教</rb><rt>せっ きょう</rt></ruby>してもどうなるものでもない。</span>／<span class="translation">His personality can’t be mended, so even giving him a lecture will accomplish nothing.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means that even if some action is attempted, it will not lead to a solution. Conveys a feeling of resignation.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x45556"><span class="number">8. </span>V-たくてもV-れない</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>急</rb><rt>きゅう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>はい</rt></ruby>って、<ruby><rb>飲</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>みに<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>きたくても<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>けないのだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Some urgent business has come up, so however much I want to go out drinking, I can’t.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>きらいな<ruby><rb>先生</rb><rt>せん せい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>前</rb><rt>まえ</rt></ruby>では、<ruby><rb>泣</rb><rt>な</rt></ruby>きたくても<ruby><rb>泣</rb><rt>な</rt></ruby>けない。</span>／<span class="translation">I couldn’t cry in front of a teacher I hate, even if I wanted to.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>医者</rb><rt>い しゃ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>止</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>められているので、<ruby><rb>甘</rb><rt>あま</rt></ruby>いものは<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べたくても<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べられない。</span>／<span class="translation">No matter how much I want to, I can’t eat sweets, since my doctor has told me not to.</span></div><div class="explanation">An idiomatic expression that combines the ても form of V-たい with the negative form of a V-れる potential verb. Means “even if I want to, I cannot.” Used to emphasize that circumstances do not allow a certain action, or to make an excuse.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x45587"><span class="number">9. </span>...てもいい<span class="reference">→<a href="part0501.xhtml#idtitlex1x45945">【てもいい】</a></span></h2><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x45594"><span class="number">10. </span>...てもかまわない<span class="reference">→<a href="part0502.xhtml#idtitlex1x46285">【てもかまわない】</a></span></h2><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x45601"><span class="number">11. </span>...てもさしつかえない<span class="reference">→<a href="part0503.xhtml#idtitlex1x46503">【てもさしつかえない】</a></span></h2><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x45608"><span class="number">12. </span>...てもしかたがない<span class="reference">→<a href="part0504.xhtml#idtitlex1x46547">【てもしかたがない】</a></span></h2><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x45615"><span class="number">13. </span>...てもみない<span class="reference">→<a href="part0495.xhtml#idsubtitlex1x44791">【てみる】5</a>、<a href="part0495.xhtml#idsubtitlex1x44840">【てみる】6</a></span></h2><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x45626"><span class="number">14. </span>...てもよろしい<span class="reference">→<a href="part0508.xhtml#idtitlex1x46744">【てもよろしい】</a></span></h2></body></html>