<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>よもや</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part1040.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【よほど】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part1042.xhtml">【より】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x104689">【よもや】</h1><h4 class="info">［よもや　...ないだろう／...まい］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>よもや<ruby><rb>負</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>けるまいと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>われていた<ruby><rb>選手</rb><rt>せん しゅ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>予選</rb><rt>よ せん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>落</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>ちした。</span>／<span class="translation">The player who it seemed could not lose lost in the preliminary rounds.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>いくらお<ruby><rb>金</rb><rt>かね</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>困</rb><rt>こま</rt></ruby>っているといっても、よもやサラ<ruby><rb>金</rb><rt>きん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>手</rb><rt>て</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>だ</rt></ruby>したりはしていないでしょうね。</span>／<span class="translation">However much financial difficulty you may be in, I hope you are not borrowing money from a loan shark.  </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>あんな<ruby><rb>雪山</rb><rt>ゆき やま</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>遭難</rb><rt>そう なん</rt></ruby>ではよもや<ruby><rb>助</rb><rt>たす</rt></ruby>かるまいと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>っていたが、<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>奇跡的</rb><rt>き せき てき</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>助</rb><rt>たす</rt></ruby>かった。</span>／<span class="translation">I thought there was no way he could be rescued from an accident on such a snowy mountain but, miraculously, he was saved.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>よもやバレることはないだろうと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>っていたのに、<ruby><rb>母</rb><rt>はは</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>嘘</rb><rt>うそ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>見抜</rb><rt>み ぬ</rt></ruby>いていた。</span>／<span class="translation">I thought there was no way I would be exposed but my mother saw through my lies.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used together with conjectural expressions, expresses a strong denial that something is possible.</div></body></html>