<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>なに...ない</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0692.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【など】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0694.xhtml">【なにか】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x63686">【なに...ない】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x63688"><span class="number">1. </span>なにひとつ...ない</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>家</rb><rt>いえ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>貧</rb><rt>まず</rt></ruby>しかったので、ほしいものはなにひとつ<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>ってもらえなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">Since my family was poor, my parents never once bought me anything that I wanted.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>あの<ruby><rb>大地震</rb><rt>だい じ しん</rt></ruby>でも、<ruby><rb>家</rb><rt>いえ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>中</rb><rt>なか</rt></ruby>のものはなにひとつ<ruby><rb>壊</rb><rt>こわ</rt></ruby>れなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">Even in that big earthquake, not a single thing in the house broke. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>こんなに<ruby><rb>一生懸命</rb><rt>いっ しょう けん めい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>工夫</rb><rt>く ふう</rt></ruby>したのに、まともな<ruby><rb>作品</rb><rt>さく ひん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>何一</rb><rt>なに ひと</rt></ruby>つ<ruby><rb>作</rb><rt>つく</rt></ruby>れていない。</span>／<span class="translation">Even though I’ve tried one thing after another, I haven’t been able to create a single decent piece.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>この<ruby><rb>店</rb><rt>みせ</rt></ruby>には、<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>いたいと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>うものは<ruby><rb>何一</rb><rt>なに ひと</rt></ruby>つない。</span>／<span class="translation">There’s nothing I want to buy in this store.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>膨大</rb><rt>ぼう だい</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>資料</rb><rt>し りょう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>調査</rb><rt>ちょう さ</rt></ruby>してみたが、<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>らの<ruby><rb>残</rb><rt>のこ</rt></ruby>した<ruby><rb>記録</rb><rt>き ろく</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>何一</rb><rt>なに ひと</rt></ruby>つ<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>つからなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">I examined an enormous amount of material, but I couldn’t find even one record they had left behind.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span>みなさんにお<ruby><rb>伝</rb><rt>つた</rt></ruby>えしなければならないような<ruby><rb>面白</rb><rt>おも しろ</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>事件</rb><rt>じ けん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>何一</rb><rt>なに ひと</rt></ruby>つ<ruby><rb>起</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>こりませんでした。</span>／<span class="translation">Not one thing happened that was interesting enough for me to have to tell all of you about.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses the emphatic denial of a certain thing or event, in the sense of “not...in the least” or “not...at all.” When used to refer to people, this expression takes the form だれひとり...ない (no one at all).</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x63737"><span class="number">2. </span>なに...ない</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>父</rb><rt>ちち</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>受</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>け<ruby><rb>継</rb><rt>つ</rt></ruby>いだ<ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>きな<ruby><rb>家</rb><rt>いえ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>住</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>んで、なに<ruby><rb>不自由</rb><rt>ふ じ ゆう</rt></ruby>なく<ruby><rb>暮</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>らしている。</span>／<span class="translation">He lives in a big house he inherited from his father, so he’s well-off and lacks for nothing.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>この<ruby><rb>会</rb><rt>かい</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>気</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>のあった<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>たちの<ruby><rb>集</rb><rt>あつ</rt></ruby>まりだから、なに<ruby><rb>気兼</rb><rt>き が</rt></ruby>ねなく<ruby><rb>自由</rb><rt>じ ゆう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>振</rb><rt>ふ</rt></ruby>る<ruby><rb>舞</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>うことができる。</span>／<span class="translation">Since this is a gathering of people who get along well with each other, I can behave freely and without constraint.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>物質的</rb><rt>ぶっ しつ てき</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なに</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>不足</rb><rt>ふ そく</rt></ruby>ない<ruby><rb>生活</rb><rt>せい かつ</rt></ruby>をしているのだが、なぜか<ruby><rb>満</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>たされない<ruby><rb>気持</rb><rt>き も</rt></ruby>ちで<ruby><rb>日々</rb><rt>ひ び</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>過</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>ごしている。</span>／<span class="translation">Although I’m materially well-off and lack for nothing in daily life, somehow I spend every day with the feeling that I’m missing out on something.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>祖父</rb><rt>そ ふ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>孫</rb><rt>まご</rt></ruby>たちに<ruby><rb>囲</rb><rt>かこ</rt></ruby>まれて、<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なに</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>不自由</rb><rt>ふ じ ゆう</rt></ruby>ない<ruby><rb>満</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>たされた<ruby><rb>老後</rb><rt>ろう ご</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>送</rb><rt>おく</rt></ruby>っている。</span>／<span class="translation">My grandfather is living a fulfilling and comfortable retirement, surrounded by his grandchildren.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used in fixed, idiomatic expressions such as なに不自由なく (in ease and comfort) or なに不自由ない (lacking for nothing). Expresses a condition of absolute satisfaction, with no inconvenience or insufficiency.</div></body></html>