<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>にかたくない</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0761.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【にかこつけて】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0763.xhtml">【にかまけて】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x70621">【にかたくない】</h1><h4 class="info">［Nにかたくない］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>このままインフレが<ruby><rb>続</rb><rt>つづ</rt></ruby>くと<ruby><rb>社会</rb><rt>しゃ かい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>不安</rb><rt>ふ あん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>増大</rb><rt>ぞう だい</rt></ruby>し、<ruby><rb>政権</rb><rt>せい けん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>基盤</rb><rt>き ばん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>危</rb><rt>あや</rt></ruby>うくなることは<ruby><rb>想像</rb><rt>そう ぞう</rt></ruby>にかたくない。</span>／<span class="translation">It is not difficult to imagine that social unrest will increase and political foundations will be shaken if inflation continues like this.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>親</rb><rt>おや</rt></ruby>からも<ruby><rb>教師</rb><rt>きょう し</rt></ruby>からも<ruby><rb>見放</rb><rt>み はな</rt></ruby>された<ruby><rb>太郎</rb><rt>た ろう</rt></ruby>が、<ruby><rb>非行</rb><rt>ひ こう</rt></ruby>グループの<ruby><rb>誘</rb><rt>さそ</rt></ruby>いに<ruby><rb>救</rb><rt>すく</rt></ruby>いを<ruby><rb>求</rb><rt>もと</rt></ruby>めそうになっただろうことは<ruby><rb>想像</rb><rt>そう ぞう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>難</rb><rt>かた</rt></ruby>くない。</span>／<span class="translation">It is not difficult to imagine that Taro, whom his parents and teacher gave up on, was probably about to jump at the tempting offer from the juvenile gang.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>なぜ<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>があのような<ruby><rb>行動</rb><rt>こう どう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>走</rb><rt>はし</rt></ruby>ったのか、<ruby><rb>事件</rb><rt>じ けん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>前後</rb><rt>ぜん ご</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>事情</rb><rt>じ じょう</rt></ruby>をよく<ruby><rb>聞</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>いてみれば<ruby><rb>理解</rb><rt>り かい</rt></ruby>にかたくない。</span>／<span class="translation">If you listen carefully to the situations before and after the incident, it is easy to understand why he took such an action. </span></div><div class="explanation">Usually used in phrases such as 想像／理解にかたくない (not difficult to imagine/understand) idiomatically. It means that one can imagine easily or it is obvious for everyone. A formal, written expression.</div></body></html>