<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ことは...が</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0231.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ことには】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0233.xhtml">【ことはない】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x18271">【ことは...が】</h1><h4 class="info">［Na なことはNa だが］</h4><h4 class="info">［AことはAが］</h4><h4 class="info">［VことはVが］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>読</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>んだことは<ruby><rb>読</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>んだが、ぜんぜん<ruby><rb>分</rb><rt>わ</rt></ruby>からなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">Though I did read it, I didn’t understand it at all. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>あの<ruby><rb>映画</rb><rt>えい が</rt></ruby>、おもしろいことはおもしろいけど、もう<ruby><rb>一度</rb><rt>いち ど</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>金</rb><rt>かね</rt></ruby>をはらって<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>たいとは<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>わないね。</span>／<span class="translation">I do agree that that movie is interesting, but I wouldn’t pay money to see it again. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>おいしかったことはおいしかったけどね、でも<ruby><rb>高</rb><rt>たか</rt></ruby>すぎるよ。</span>／<span class="translation">Yes, it was delicious, but it’s too expensive!</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>どうしてもやれと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>うなら、いちおうやってみることは（やって）みるけど、うまく<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>かないと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>うよ。</span>／<span class="translation">If you insist, I will at least give it a try, but I don’t think it will work. </span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><span class="number">A:</span>ひさしぶり。<ruby><rb>元気</rb><rt>げん き</rt></ruby>だった？</span>／<span class="translation">Long time no see. How have you been? </span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span><ruby><rb>元気</rb><rt>げん き</rt></ruby>なことは<ruby><rb>元気</rb><rt>げん き</rt></ruby>なんだけどねえ。なにかもうひとつ<ruby><rb>満</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>たされない<ruby><rb>気分</rb><rt>き ぶん</rt></ruby>なんだなあ。</span>／<span class="translation">I am doing well, but even so.... I feel like something’s missing. </span></div><div class="explanation">The same word is repeated. This pattern expresses concession. It is used when the speaker acknowledges something to a certain extent, but not vigorously or completely.</div><div class="explanation">When a verb is used, as in (1) and (4), it means that the speaker will perform (or has performed) the action but thinks that the result will not be (or was not) satisfactory. Often used with てみる. When a noun or an adjective is used with this pattern, as in (2), (3), and (5), it means “although I do not deny such-and-such....” For example, (2) can be paraphrased as おもしろくない(という)わけではないが (it’s not that it isn’t interesting).</div><div class="explanation">When this pattern is used to refer to past events, sometimes both words are changed to the <i>ta</i>-form, as in (1), and sometimes only the second word is changed, as in the example below. </div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>読むことは読んだが、ぜんぜん分からなかった。／I did read it, but I didn’t understand it at all. </div></body></html>