<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>として</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0585.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【としたら】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0587.xhtml">【として...ない】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x55649">【として】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x55651"><span class="number">1. </span>Nとして</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>研究生</rb><rt>けん きゅう せい</rt></ruby>としてこの<ruby><rb>大学</rb><rt>だい がく</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>勉強</rb><rt>べん きょう</rt></ruby>している。</span>／<span class="translation">I am studying at this university as a research student. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>日本軍</rb><rt>に ほん ぐん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>おこな</rt></ruby>った<ruby><rb>行為</rb><rt>こう い</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>日本人</rb><rt>に ほん じん</rt></ruby>として<ruby><rb>恥</rb><rt>は</rt></ruby>ずかしく<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>う。</span>／<span class="translation">As a Japanese, I am ashamed of the actions of the Japanese soldiers. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>がこんなひどい<ruby><rb>目</rb><rt>め</rt></ruby>にあわされては、<ruby><rb>親</rb><rt>おや</rt></ruby>として<ruby><rb>黙</rb><rt>だま</rt></ruby>っているわけにはいかない。</span>／<span class="translation">As a parent, I cannot sit back and say nothing while children are being treated so badly.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>大学</rb><rt>だい がく</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>教授</rb><rt>きょう じゅ</rt></ruby>としてより、むしろ<ruby><rb>作家</rb><rt>さっ か</rt></ruby>としての<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>ほう</rt></ruby>がよく<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>られている。</span>／<span class="translation">He is better known as a writer than as a college professor. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>趣味</rb><rt>しゅ み</rt></ruby>として<ruby><rb>書道</rb><rt>しょ どう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>勉強</rb><rt>べん きょう</rt></ruby>している。</span>／<span class="translation">I am studying calligraphy as a hobby. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>学長</rb><rt>がく ちょう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>代理</rb><rt>だい り</rt></ruby>として<ruby><rb>会議</rb><rt>かい ぎ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>出席</rb><rt>しゅっ せき</rt></ruby>した。</span>／<span class="translation">I attended the meeting in place of the college president.  </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（7）</span><ruby><rb>大統領</rb><rt>だい とう りょう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>国賓</rb><rt>こく ひん</rt></ruby>として<ruby><rb>待遇</rb><rt>たい ぐう</rt></ruby>する。</span>／<span class="translation">We will treat the president as a state guest. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（8）</span><ruby><rb>軽井沢</rb><rt>かる い ざわ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>古</rb><rt>ふる</rt></ruby>くから<ruby><rb>避暑地</rb><rt>ひ しょ ち</rt></ruby>として<ruby><rb>人気</rb><rt>にん き</rt></ruby>があるところだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Karuizawa has long been popular as a resort to get away from the summer heat. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（9）</span><ruby><rb>文学者</rb><rt>ぶん がく しゃ</rt></ruby>としては<ruby><rb>高</rb><rt>たか</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>評価</rb><rt>ひょう か</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>得</rb><rt>え</rt></ruby>ている<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>も、<ruby><rb>家庭人</rb><rt>か てい じん</rt></ruby>としては<ruby><rb>失格</rb><rt>しっ かく</rt></ruby>である。</span>／<span class="translation">While he has received great acclaim as a literary scholar, as a family man he is a failure. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（10）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>料理</rb><rt>りょう り</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>腕前</rb><rt>うで まえ</rt></ruby>はプロのコックとしても<ruby><rb>十分</rb><rt>じゅう ぶん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>通用</rb><rt>つう よう</rt></ruby>するほどのものだ。</span>／<span class="translation">His cooking skills are good enough for him to make it as a professional chef. </span></div><div class="explanation">Attaches to nouns and expresses a qualification, position, category, or title.  </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x55724"><span class="number">2. </span>Nとしては<span class="reference">→<a href="part0588.xhtml#idtitlex1x55858">【としては】</a></span></h2><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x55731"><span class="number">3. </span>Nとしても</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>としてもこの<ruby><rb>件</rb><rt>けん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>関</rb><rt>かん</rt></ruby>しては<ruby><rb>当惑</rb><rt>とう わく</rt></ruby>しております。 </span>／<span class="translation">I, too, am at a loss with respect to this matter. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>学長</rb><rt>がく ちょう</rt></ruby>としても、<ruby><rb>教授会</rb><rt>きょう じゅ かい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>意向</rb><rt>い こう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>無視</rb><rt>む し</rt></ruby>するわけにはいかないだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">Even as the university president, I can’t very well ignore the will of the faculty, can I?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>会社</rb><rt>かい しゃ</rt></ruby>といたしましても、この<ruby><rb>度</rb><rt>たび</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>不祥事</rb><rt>ふ しょう じ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>誠</rb><rt>まこと</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>遺憾</rb><rt>い かん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>っております。</span>／<span class="translation">Speaking for the company, I feel that this scandal is truly regrettable. </span></div><div class="explanation">Attaches to nouns denoting people or organizations and means “also from such-and-such a stance or perspective.” May also be used in the polite form, as in (3). The difference between としては and としても is that the latter implies there are also other people or members of an organization who have the same stance or perspective.</div><h4 class="reference">→<a href="part0589.xhtml#idtitlex1x55957">【としても】</a></h4><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x55766"><span class="number">4. </span>NとしてのN</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>教師</rb><rt>きょう し</rt></ruby>としてではなく、<ruby><rb>一人</rb><rt>ひとり</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>人間</rb><rt>にん げん</rt></ruby>としての<ruby><rb>立場</rb><rt>たち ば</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>発言</rb><rt>はつ げん</rt></ruby>したいと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>う。</span>／<span class="translation">I would like to speak not as a teacher but from the standpoint of a single human being.  </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>にも<ruby><rb>男</rb><rt>おとこ</rt></ruby>としての<ruby><rb>意地</rb><rt>い じ</rt></ruby>があるはずです。</span>／<span class="translation">He too must have some male pride. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>日本</rb><rt>に ほん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>代表</rb><rt>だい ひょう</rt></ruby>としての<ruby><rb>責任</rb><rt>せき にん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>強</rb><rt>つよ</rt></ruby>く<ruby><rb>感</rb><rt>かん</rt></ruby>じ、<ruby><rb>精一杯</rb><rt>せい いっ ぱい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>頑張</rb><rt>がん ば</rt></ruby>りたいと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>います。 </span>／<span class="translation">I feel a strong sense of responsibility as a representative of Japan, and I pledge to do my utmost. </span></div><div class="explanation">Nとして (as a/an N) is used to modify another noun. </div></body></html>