<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>いっさい</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0056.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【いっこうに】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0058.xhtml">【いつしか】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x5674">【いっさい】</h1><h4 class="info">［いっさいない］</h4><h4 class="info">［いっさい V-ない］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>計画</rb><rt>けい かく</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>変更</rb><rt>へん こう</rt></ruby>はいっさいない。</span>／<span class="translation">The plan will not never be changed under any circumstances.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>そのような<ruby><rb>事実</rb><rt>じ じつ</rt></ruby>はいっさいございません。</span>／<span class="translation">I strongly deny such a “fact.”</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>なにか<ruby><rb>問題</rb><rt>もん だい</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>起</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>こっても、こちらはいっさい<ruby><rb>責任</rb><rt>せき にん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>持</rb><rt>も</rt></ruby>ちませんので、その<ruby><rb>点</rb><rt>てん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>御了承</rb><rt>ご りょう しょう</rt></ruby>ください。</span>／<span class="translation">Even if some problem occurs, we will not assume any responsibility whatsoever for it. I hope we have your understanding on this point.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>詳</rb><rt>くわ</rt></ruby>しいことについての<ruby><rb>説明</rb><rt>せつ めい</rt></ruby>はいっさいなされなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">There was no explanation at all concerning the details.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>料理</rb><rt>りょう り</rt></ruby>にはいっさい<ruby><rb>手</rb><rt>て</rt></ruby>をつけず、お<ruby><rb>酒</rb><rt>さけ</rt></ruby>ばかり<ruby><rb>飲</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>んでいた。</span>／<span class="translation">He didn’t touch any food at all, he just drank alcohol.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “there is not...at all” and emphasizes the meaning of negation. This is the same as まったく...ない and 全然...ない. It is typical of written language. </div></body></html>