<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>とあって</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0515.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【とあいまって】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0517.xhtml">【といい】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x48606">【とあって】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x48608"><span class="number">1. </span>...とあって</h2><h4 class="info">［Nとあって］</h4><h4 class="info">［Vとあって］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>今日</rb><rt>きょう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>三</rb><rt>さん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>連休</rb><rt>れん きゅう</rt></ruby>とあって、<ruby><rb>全国</rb><rt>ぜん こく</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>行楽地</rb><rt>こう らく ち</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>家族</rb><rt>か ぞく</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>連</rb><rt>づ</rt></ruby>れの<ruby><rb>観光客</rb><rt>かん こう きゃく</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>賑</rb><rt>にぎ</rt></ruby>わいました。</span>／<span class="translation">Since today is part of a three-day holiday, the nation's leisure spots are bustling with family vacationers.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>一年</rb><rt>いち ねん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>一回</rb><rt>いっ かい</rt></ruby>のお<ruby><rb>祭</rb><rt>まつ</rt></ruby>りとあって、<ruby><rb>村</rb><rt>むら</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>はみんな<ruby><rb>神社</rb><rt>じん じゃ</rt></ruby>へ<ruby><rb>集</rb><rt>あつ</rt></ruby>まっていた。</span>／<span class="translation">This being the only festival of the year, the villagers all gathered at the shrine.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>めったに<ruby><rb>聞</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>けない<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>生演奏</rb><rt>なま えん そう</rt></ruby>とあって、<ruby><rb>狭</rb><rt>せま</rt></ruby>いクラブは<ruby><rb>満員</rb><rt>まん いん</rt></ruby>になった。</span>／<span class="translation">As he rarely performed live, the tiny club was filled to capacity.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>大型</rb><rt>おお がた</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>台風</rb><rt>たい ふう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>接近</rb><rt>せっ きん</rt></ruby>しているとあって、どの<ruby><rb>家</rb><rt>いえ</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>対策</rb><rt>たい さく</rt></ruby>におおわらわだ。</span>／<span class="translation">With the huge typhoon drawing near, every household was frantic with preparations.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>名画</rb><rt>めい が</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>無料</rb><rt>む りょう</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>られるとあって、<ruby><rb>席</rb><rt>せき</rt></ruby>ははやばやと<ruby><rb>埋</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>まってしまった。</span>／<span class="translation">Since the famous film could be seen for free, every seat was soon filled.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “due to such-and-such a situation.” Used to indicate special circumstances and implies that a statement of something that will naturally occur under those circumstances, or a statement of an action that should be taken, will follow. A written language expression used in news broadcasts and so on.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x48655"><span class="number">2. </span>...とあっては</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>伊藤</rb><rt>い とう</rt></ruby>さんの<ruby><rb>頼</rb><rt>たの</rt></ruby>みとあっては、<ruby><rb>断</rb><rt>ことわ</rt></ruby>れない。</span>／<span class="translation">Since it's a request from Ito-san, I cannot refuse.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>講演</rb><rt>こう えん</rt></ruby>するとあっては、<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>とかして<ruby><rb>聞</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>きに<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>かねばならない。</span>／<span class="translation">He’s the one giving the lecture, so I have to find some way to go hear it.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>高価</rb><rt>こう か</rt></ruby>なじゅうたんが<ruby><rb>定価</rb><rt>てい か</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>一割</rb><rt>いち わり</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>えるとあっては、<ruby><rb>店</rb><rt>みせ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>混雑</rb><rt>こん ざつ</rt></ruby>しないはずがありません。</span>／<span class="translation">With such an expensive carpet being sold for a tenth of its list price, I wouldn't expect the store not to be packed with people.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>最新</rb><rt>さい しん</rt></ruby>のコンピューター<ruby><rb>機器</rb><rt>き き</rt></ruby>がすべて<ruby><rb>展示</rb><rt>てん じ</rt></ruby>されるとあっては、コンピューターマニアの<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>かないわけがない。</span>／<span class="translation">With all the latest computer equipment on display, there's no way a computer geek like him wouldn't go.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “because this is the situation.” Used for special circumstances and is followed by a statement of something that will naturally occur under those circumstances, or a statement of an action that should be taken. For example, (1) would be used in a situation where a refusal is unthinkable because Ito-san is a very important person to the speaker. Although this is a somewhat formal expression, it can be used in spoken language.</div></body></html>