<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>まさか</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0936.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【まえ】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0938.xhtml">【まさに】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x88830">【まさか】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x88832"><span class="number">1. </span>まさか...ないだろう</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>何度</rb><rt>なん ど</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>念</rb><rt>ねん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>押</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>しておいたから、まさか<ruby><rb>遅</rb><rt>おく</rt></ruby>れることはないだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">Since I reminded him so many times, I don’t think he would dare to be late.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>いくら<ruby><rb>強</rb><rt>つよ</rt></ruby>いといっても、<ruby><rb>相手</rb><rt>あい て</rt></ruby>はまだ<ruby><rb>小学生</rb><rt>しょう がく せい</rt></ruby>だ。まさか<ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>だい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>大人</rb><rt>おとな</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>負</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>けるようなことはないだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">However strong his opponent may be, it’s still just an elementary school child. There’s no way a grown adult could lose to him.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>まさかそんなことはないと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>うが<ruby><rb>念</rb><rt>ねん</rt></ruby>のためにもう<ruby><rb>一度</rb><rt>いち ど</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>調</rb><rt>しら</rt></ruby>べてみよう。</span>／<span class="translation">I don’t think it is possible, but to be sure, I will check it again.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>あんなに<ruby><rb>何度</rb><rt>なん ど</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>練習</rb><rt>れん しゅう</rt></ruby>したのだから、まさか<ruby><rb>失敗</rb><rt>しっ ぱい</rt></ruby>することはあるまい。</span>／<span class="translation">Since she practiced so many times, a failure is simply unthinkable.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><span class="number">A:</span>お<ruby><rb>金</rb><rt>かね</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>足</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>りませんが...</span>／<span class="translation">I’m afraid there isn’t enough money....</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>まさかそんなはずはない。</span>／<span class="translation">That’s impossible!</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><span class="number">A:</span>だれが<ruby><rb>秘密</rb><rt>ひ みつ</rt></ruby>をもらしたんだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">I wonder who leaked the secret.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span><ruby><rb>君</rb><rt>きみ</rt></ruby>、まさか<ruby><rb>僕</rb><rt>ぼく</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>疑</rb><rt>うたが</rt></ruby>っているんじゃないだろうね。</span>／<span class="translation">Surely you’re not suspecting that it was me!</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（7）</span>まさか、あなた、あの<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>結婚</rb><rt>けっ こん</rt></ruby>する<ruby><rb>気</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>じゃないでしょうね。</span>／<span class="translation">Come now, you’re not intending to marry that person, are you?</span></div><div class="explanation">Negative expressions such as ないだろう, まい, はずはない and わけがない at the ends of sentences express the speaker’s negative thoughts that “something like that cannot happen” or “it cannot be true.” Also, as in the cases of (6) and (7), they can express the speaker’s strong doubt when used in the structure まさか...じゃないだろう／でしょうね.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x88911"><span class="number">2. </span>まさか...とはおもわなかった</h2><h4 class="info">［まさか N だとはおもわなかった］</h4><h4 class="info">［まさか Na だとはおもわなかった］</h4><h4 class="info">［まさか A とはおもわなかった］</h4><h4 class="info">［まさか V とはおもわなかった］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>山田</rb><rt>やま だ</rt></ruby>さんが<ruby><rb>病気</rb><rt>びょう き</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>入院</rb><rt>にゅう いん</rt></ruby>しているとは<ruby><rb>聞</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>いていたが、まさかこんなに<ruby><rb>悪</rb><rt>わる</rt></ruby>いとは<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>わなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">I had heard that Yamada-san was in the hospital, but I had no idea it was this serious.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>まさか<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>優勝</rb><rt>ゆう しょう</rt></ruby>できるとは<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>いませんでした。</span>／<span class="translation">I never thought for a moment that I might win first place.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>まさか<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>があんな<ruby><rb>冗談</rb><rt>じょう だん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>本</rb><rt>ほん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>気</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>にするとは<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>わなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">I didn’t think he would take such a joke seriously.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>まさか<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>がこんなに<ruby><rb>早</rb><rt>はや</rt></ruby>く<ruby><rb>亡</rb><rt>な</rt></ruby>くなるなんて<ruby><rb>誰</rb><rt>だれ</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>想像</rb><rt>そう ぞう</rt></ruby>していなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">Nobody imagined that he might die so soon.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>まさかこんな<ruby><rb>大惨事</rb><rt>だい さん じ</rt></ruby>になるとは<ruby><rb>誰</rb><rt>だれ</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>予想</rb><rt>よ そう</rt></ruby>していなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">No one foresaw a disaster of this magnitude.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>犯人</rb><rt>はん にん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>だったよ。</span>／<span class="translation">He was the culprit.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>まさか。</span>／<span class="translation">Impossible!</span></div><div class="explanation">Accompanying phrases such as とは思わなかった, とは知らなかった express how surprised the speaker is by an unforeseen turn of an event. In spoken language, まさか may be used on its own, as in the case of (6).</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x88980"><span class="number">3. </span>まさか+<ruby><rb>否</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>定</rb><rt>てい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>表</rb><rt>ひょう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>現</rb><rt>げん</rt></ruby></h2><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><span class="number">A:</span>あんな<ruby><rb>失敗</rb><rt>しっ ぱい</rt></ruby>をするなんて、あいつは<ruby><rb>馬鹿</rb><rt>ば か</rt></ruby>じゃないか。もっときつく<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ったほうがいいんじゃないですか。</span>／<span class="translation">He must be an idiot to make such a mistake. Shouldn’t you talk to him more strongly ?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>まさか<ruby><rb>本人</rb><rt>ほん にん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>面</rb><rt>めん</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>向</rb><rt>む</rt></ruby>かって「ばか」とも<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>えないじゃないか。</span>／<span class="translation">I can’t very well tell him to his face that he is an idiot, can I?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>いくら<ruby><rb>助</rb><rt>たす</rt></ruby>けてやりたくても、まさかテストの<ruby><rb>答</rb><rt>こた</rt></ruby>えを<ruby><rb>教</rb><rt>おし</rt></ruby>えるわけにもいかないし、<ruby><rb>自力</rb><rt>じ りき</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>頑張</rb><rt>がん ば</rt></ruby>ってもらうしかない。</span>／<span class="translation">However much I would like to help her, I certainly cannot tell her the answers to the test, so all I can do is leave her to do his best.</span></div><div class="explanation">By giving an extreme example of an action that the speaker cannot or will not take using the negative potential form V-れる, or other negative expressions such as ともいえない or わけにもいかない, it is used to indicate the speaker’s emotions such as annoyance, irritation, displeasure, frustration, or even despair about the present situation to the extent of contemplating taking such an action.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x89017"><span class="number">4. </span>まさかのN</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>健康</rb><rt>けん こう</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>自信</rb><rt>じ しん</rt></ruby>があるが、<ruby><rb>家族</rb><rt>か ぞく</rt></ruby>のことを<ruby><rb>考</rb><rt>かんが</rt></ruby>えてまさかの<ruby><rb>時</rb><rt>とき</rt></ruby>のために<ruby><rb>保険</rb><rt>ほ けん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>はい</rt></ruby>っている。</span>／<span class="translation">I have no worries about my health, but I do have a life insurance policy in consideration of my family in a worst-case scenario.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>まさかの<ruby><rb>場合</rb><rt>ば あい</rt></ruby>は、ここに<ruby><rb>電話</rb><rt>でん わ</rt></ruby>してください。</span>／<span class="translation">In case anything unforeseen should happen, please call this number.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “in case of emergency, should an unlikely event take place.”</div></body></html>