<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ではないか1</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0483.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ではない】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0485.xhtml">【ではないか<sub class="variation">2</sub>】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x43736">【ではないか<sub class="variation">1</sub>】</h1><h4 class="info">［N／Na／A／V　ではないか］</h4><div class="explanation">Attaches to plain forms and expresses surprise on the part of the speaker, or the intention to press the addressee for acknowledgement. With nouns or the dictionary form of <i>na</i>-adjectives, ではないか can be attached directly without using だ. However, for non-dictionary forms, だった／ではない／ではなかった must be inserted.</div><div class="explanation">This is a fixed expression consisting of the negative interrogative form of だ, and it has the tone of written language or a somewhat formal situation. Usually used by men. In casual conversation, men use the form じゃないか and women the forms じゃない or じゃないの. The form じゃん, which is even more casual, is used by both sexes. In polite language, the forms ではないですか and ではありませんか are used. Always appears in the dictionary form and cannot be used in the <i>ta</i>-form; this, as well as the fact that it cannot be combined with だろうか are what distinguish it from ではないか<sub>2</sub>.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x43773"><span class="number">1. </span>...ではないか〈surprise, discovery〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>やあ、<ruby><rb>大野</rb><rt>おお の</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>君</rb><rt>くん</rt></ruby>ではないか。</span>／<span class="translation">Well, if it isn’t Ono-kun!</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>これはすごい、<ruby><rb>純金</rb><rt>じゅん きん</rt></ruby>ではないか。</span>／<span class="translation">This is really something—pure gold, right?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>なんだ、<ruby><rb>中身</rb><rt>なか み</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>空</rb><rt>から</rt></ruby>っぽではないか。</span>／<span class="translation">What’s this? There’s nothing inside it, is there?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>この<ruby><rb>店</rb><rt>みせ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>料理</rb><rt>りょう り</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>結構</rb><rt>けっ こう</rt></ruby>おいしいではありませんか。</span>／<span class="translation">Wouldn’t you say that this restaurant has pretty good food?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>このレポートなかなかよくできているではありませんか。</span>／<span class="translation">This report really is actually rather good, isn’t it.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses surprise at an unanticipated discovery. If the discovery is something desirable, then ではないか conveys a favorable impression, as in (4) and (5). If the discovery is contrary to one’s expectations, then the meaning is disappointment or discouragement, as in (3).</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x43819"><span class="number">2. </span>...ではないか〈criticism〉</h2><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>悪</rb><rt>わる</rt></ruby>いのは<ruby><rb>君</rb><rt>きみ</rt></ruby>のほうではないか。</span>／<span class="translation">Aren’t you the one who’s really at fault?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span><ruby><rb>僕</rb><rt>ぼく</rt></ruby>はそうは<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>いませんが。</span>／<span class="translation">I don’t see it that way.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>病人</rb><rt>びょう にん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>連</rb><rt>つ</rt></ruby>れ<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>だ</rt></ruby>したりしたら、だめじゃないか。</span>／<span class="translation">Don’t you think it’s a bad idea to take a sick person out on a jaunt?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>はい、これから<ruby><rb>気</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>をつけます。</span>／<span class="translation">Yes, I’ll be more careful from now on.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><span class="number">A:</span>おそかったじゃないか。</span>／<span class="translation">You’re late, aren’t you?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>あの、<ruby><rb>道</rb><rt>みち</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>混</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>んでいたんです。</span>／<span class="translation">Well, the traffic was really bad.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><span class="number">A:</span>まずいじゃありませんか、そんな<ruby><rb>発言</rb><rt>はつ げん</rt></ruby>をしては。</span>／<span class="translation">Isn’t there going to be trouble if you say that?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>そうですか。</span>／<span class="translation">You think so?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><span class="number">A:</span>はじめにそう<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ってくれなくては<ruby><rb>困</rb><rt>こま</rt></ruby>るではないか。</span>／<span class="translation">We could have avoided a lot of trouble if you had told us that at the beginning.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>すみません、<ruby><rb>気</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>がつかなくて。</span>／<span class="translation">I’m sorry, I wasn’t thinking.</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to reproach or criticize an addressee of the same or lower status. The purpose is to make the addressee acknowledge properly that <span class="noSeparate">s/he</span> is responsible for an undesirable state of affairs. Used with falling intonation.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x43925"><span class="number">3. </span>...ではないか〈confirmation〉</h2><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>同級生</rb><rt>どう きゅう せい</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>田中</rb><rt>た なか</rt></ruby>さんという<ruby><rb>女</rb><rt>おんな</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>子</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>がいたじゃないか。</span>／<span class="translation">Wasn’t there a girl in your class named Tanaka-san?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>ああ、<ruby><rb>髪</rb><rt>かみ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>長</rb><rt>なが</rt></ruby>くてやせた<ruby><rb>子</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>ね。</span>／<span class="translation">Oh yes, a thin girl with long hair.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><span class="number">A:</span>あそこに、<ruby><rb>郵便局</rb><rt>ゆう びん きょく</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>えるじゃないですか。</span>／<span class="translation">You can see the post office over there, right?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>ええ。</span>／<span class="translation">Yes.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">A:</span>あの<ruby><rb>手前</rb><rt>て まえ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>角</rb><rt>かど</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>右</rb><rt>みぎ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>曲</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>がってください。</span>／<span class="translation">At the corner just before it, please turn right.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>地下道</rb><rt>ち か どう</rt></ruby>などによくいるではありませんか。ああいう<ruby><rb>男</rb><rt>おとこ</rt></ruby>が。</span>／<span class="translation">Aren’t they usually in places like underground passageways— that kind of man?</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to remind the listener of a person or thing <span class="noSeparate">s/he</span> already knows, or to bring attention to something that can be seen or heard at the present location. Since this usage is associated with a desire to confirm that the listener has understood, it is often spoken with rising intonation, and it can be substituted with other expressions of confirmation such as だろう and でしょう.</div><div class="explanation">Because this usage is almost exclusively conversational, the form ではないか is actually not used very often. The forms じゃないか, じゃありませんか, and じゃないですか are used instead.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x44000"><span class="number">4. </span>V-ようではないか</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>このクラスみんなでディベート<ruby><rb>大会</rb><rt>たい かい</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>申</rb><rt>もう</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>込</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>もうではないか。</span>／<span class="translation">Why don’t all of us in this class apply for the debate contest?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>とにかく、<ruby><rb>最後</rb><rt>さい ご</rt></ruby>まで<ruby><rb>頑張</rb><rt>がん ば</rt></ruby>ってみようではないか。</span>／<span class="translation">Anyway, can’t we give it our best right up to the end?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>遠</rb><rt>とお</rt></ruby>くからはるばる<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>たのだから、お<ruby><rb>金</rb><rt>かね</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>心配</rb><rt>しん ぱい</rt></ruby>などしないで<ruby><rb>十分</rb><rt>じゅう ぶん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>楽</rb><rt>たの</rt></ruby>しもうではないか。</span>／<span class="translation">Since we’ve come all this way, let’s not worry about money and things, let’s just enjoy ourselves!</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>売</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>られた<ruby><rb>喧嘩</rb><rt>けん か</rt></ruby>だ。<ruby><rb>受</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>けて<ruby><rb>立</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>とうじゃないか。</span>／<span class="translation">They’re asking for a fight. What’s to stop us from taking the challenge?</span></div><div class="explanation">Attached to the intentional form of a verb, this is used to suggest joint action or to express strongly one’s personal intention. A slightly formal expression, ordinarily used by males.</div></body></html>