<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>かつ</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0125.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【がち】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0127.xhtml">【かつて】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x11410">【かつ】</h1><h4 class="info">［N（であり）かつN］</h4><h4 class="info">［Na かつ Na］</h4><h4 class="info">［RかつV］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>これで、<ruby><rb>福祉</rb><rt>ふく し</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>会館</rb><rt>かいかん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>建設</rb><rt>けん せつ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>関</rb><rt>かん</rt></ruby>する<ruby><rb>議案</rb><rt>ぎ あん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>提出</rb><rt>てい しゅつ</rt></ruby>するのに<ruby><rb>必要</rb><rt>ひつ よう</rt></ruby>かつ<ruby><rb>十分</rb><rt>じゅう ぶん</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>条件</rb><rt>じょう けん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>整</rb><rt>ととの</rt></ruby>った。</span>／<span class="translation">Now we have satisfied the conditions both necessary and sufficient to introduce a bill concerning the construction of a social welfare center.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>今回</rb><rt>こん かい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>大胆</rb><rt>だい たん</rt></ruby>かつ<ruby><rb>巧妙</rb><rt>こう みょう</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>手口</rb><rt>て ぐち</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>犯行</rb><rt>はん こう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>犯人像</rb><rt>はん にん ぞう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>割</rb><rt>わ</rt></ruby>り<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>だ</rt></ruby>す<ruby><rb>手</rb><rt>て</rt></ruby>がかりになるものと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>われる。</span>／<span class="translation">It seems that this bold and clever modus operandi could be a clue to work out a profile of the culprit.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>その<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>らせを<ruby><rb>聞</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>いて<ruby><rb>一同</rb><rt>いちどう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>皆</rb><rt>みな</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>驚</rb><rt>おどろ</rt></ruby>きかつ<ruby><rb>喜</rb><rt>よろこ</rt></ruby>び、<ruby><rb>中</rb><rt>なか</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>涙</rb><rt>なみだ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>流</rb><rt>なが</rt></ruby>す<ruby><rb>者</rb><rt>もの</rt></ruby>さえいた。</span>／<span class="translation">When they heard the news, they were surprised and also delighted. Some among them even cried.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>我々</rb><rt>われ われ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>久</rb><rt>ひさ</rt></ruby>しぶりの<ruby><rb>再会</rb><rt>さい かい</rt></ruby>に、<ruby><rb>陽気</rb><rt>よう き</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>騒</rb><rt>さわ</rt></ruby>ぎかつ<ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>いに<ruby><rb>飲</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>み、<ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby>のたつのも<ruby><rb>忘</rb><rt>わす</rt></ruby>れた。</span>／<span class="translation">When we were reunited after a long separation, we partied hard and drank so much that we lost track of time.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>親友</rb><rt>しん ゆう</rt></ruby>であり、かつライバルでもある。</span>／<span class="translation">He is both my best friend and a rival.</span></div><div class="explanation">Lists two states that are both true. Has the same meaning as そして (and also). Used in written language. In spoken language, the <i>te</i>-form is usually used, as in 必要で十分 (necessary and sufficient) or 騒いで飲む (partying and drinking).</div></body></html>