<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>いぜん1</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0045.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【いずれ<sub class="variation">2</sub>】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0047.xhtml">【いぜん<sub class="variation">2</sub>】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x5099">【いぜん<sub class="variation">1</sub>】</h1><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>その<ruby><rb>問題</rb><rt>もん だい</rt></ruby>はいぜん<ruby><rb>解決</rb><rt>かい けつ</rt></ruby>されないままになっている。</span>／<span class="translation">That problem remains unsolved. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>裁判</rb><rt>さい ばん</rt></ruby>ざたになっているにも<ruby><rb>関</rb><rt>かか</rt></ruby>わらず、<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>依然</rb><rt>い ぜん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>自分</rb><rt>じ ぶん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なに</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>らないと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>張</rb><rt>は</rt></ruby>っている。</span>／<span class="translation">In spite of being taken to court, he still keeps insisting that he doesn’t know anything at all.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>ゴルフ<ruby><rb>場</rb><rt>じょう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>建設</rb><rt>けん せつ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>工事</rb><rt>こう じ</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>依然</rb><rt>い ぜん</rt></ruby>として<ruby><rb>再開</rb><rt>さい かい</rt></ruby>されていない。</span>／<span class="translation">The construction of the golf course has not resumed yet. </span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses the state of a situation that hasn’t changed for a long period. Typical of written language. Same as 未だ(に). 依然として (still, as yet) is an idiom. </div></body></html>