<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>につき</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0807.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【について】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0809.xhtml">【につけ】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x72863">【につき】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x72868"><span class="number">1. </span>Nにつき〈about, regarding〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>本部</rb><rt>ほん ぶ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>移転</rb><rt>い てん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>問題</rb><rt>もん だい</rt></ruby>につき<ruby><rb>審議</rb><rt>しん ぎ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>おこな</rt></ruby>われた。</span>／<span class="translation">There was a debate over the issue of relocating the head office.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>領土</rb><rt>りょう ど</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>分割案</rb><rt>ぶん かつ あん</rt></ruby>につき<ruby><rb>関係</rb><rt>かん けい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>各国</rb><rt>かっ こく</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>代表</rb><rt>だい ひょう</rt></ruby>から<ruby><rb>厳</rb><rt>きび</rt></ruby>しい<ruby><rb>批判</rb><rt>ひ はん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>浴</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>びせられた。</span>／<span class="translation">The proposal of territorial division was harshly condemned by representatives of all countries concerned.</span></div><div class="explanation">A formal expression of Nについて.</div><h4 class="reference">→<a href="part0807.xhtml#idsubtitlex1x72766">【について】1</a></h4><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x72901"><span class="number">2. </span>Nにつき〈reason〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>改装中</rb><rt>かい そう ちゅう</rt></ruby>につきしばらくお<ruby><rb>休</rb><rt>やす</rt></ruby>みさせていただきます。</span>／<span class="translation">The restaurant is closed temporarily for renovation.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>父</rb><rt>ちち</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>高齢</rb><rt>こう れい</rt></ruby>につき<ruby><rb>参加</rb><rt>さん か</rt></ruby>をとりやめさせていただきます。</span>／<span class="translation">I’m afraid that my father will have to forego attending on account of his advanced age.</span></div><div class="explanation">With a noun, expresses the meaning of “for reasons of N (something).” について is used in a formal letter.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x72926"><span class="number">3. </span>N+<ruby><rb>数</rb><rt>すう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>量</rb><rt>りょう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>詞</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>+につき</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>参加者</rb><rt>さん か しゃ</rt></ruby> 200 <ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>にん</rt></ruby>につき、5<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>にん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>随行員</rb><rt>ずい こう いん</rt></ruby>がついた。</span>／<span class="translation">Five attendants are allocated to 200 participants.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>テニスコートの<ruby><rb>使用料</rb><rt>し よう りょう</rt></ruby>は1<ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby>につき<ruby><rb>千円</rb><rt>せん えん</rt></ruby>ちょうだいします。</span>／<span class="translation">The fee for one hour of court time (for tennis) is 1,000 yen. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>食費</rb><rt>しょく ひ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>1人</rb><rt>ひとり</rt></ruby>1<ruby><rb>日</rb><rt>にち</rt></ruby>につき2<ruby><rb>千円</rb><rt>せん えん</rt></ruby>かかる。</span>／<span class="translation">It costs each person 2,000 yen for meals per day.</span></div><div class="explanation">A formal expression of N + numeral + について.</div><h4 class="reference">→<a href="part0807.xhtml#idsubtitlex1x72830">【について】2</a></h4></body></html>