<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ではなくて</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0488.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ではなかろうか】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0490.xhtml">【てはならない】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x44375">【ではなくて】</h1><h4 class="info">［N／Na　（なの）ではなくて］</h4><h4 class="info">［Aのではなくて］</h4><h4 class="info">［Vのではなくて］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>がこの<ruby><rb>前</rb><rt>まえ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>一緒</rb><rt>いっ しょ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>歩</rb><rt>ある</rt></ruby>いていた<ruby><rb>女性</rb><rt>じょ せい</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>恋人</rb><rt>こい びと</rt></ruby>ではなくて、<ruby><rb>妹</rb><rt>いもうと</rt></ruby>なのだそうだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Apparently the woman he was walking with the other day wasn’t his girlfriend—it was his younger sister.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>わたしが<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>ったのは、<ruby><rb>日英</rb><rt>にちえい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>辞書</rb><rt>じ しょ</rt></ruby>ではなくて、<ruby><rb>英日</rb><rt>えいにち</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>辞書</rb><rt>じ しょ</rt></ruby>です。</span>／<span class="translation">I didn’t buy a Japanese-English dictionary but an English-Japanese one.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><span class="number">A:</span>つまり、<ruby><rb>報酬</rb><rt>ほう しゅう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>少</rb><rt>すく</rt></ruby>なすぎるとおっしゃるんですね。</span>／<span class="translation">In other words, you’re saying that the compensation is too low.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>いや、そうではなくて、<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>量</rb><rt>りょう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>問題</rb><rt>もん だい</rt></ruby>なんです。</span>／<span class="translation">No, it’s not that—it’s the amount of work that’s the problem.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><span class="number">A:</span>じゃあ、<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>会</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>ってくれるんですね。いつ<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>けばいいんですか。</span>／<span class="translation">OK, so he’s agreed to meet us. When should we go see him?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>いや、わたしたちが<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>のところへ<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>くのではなくて、<ruby><rb>向</rb><rt>む</rt></ruby>こうから<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>るというんです。</span>／<span class="translation">No, no, we aren’t going to see him—he says he’s going to come to see us.</span></div><div class="explanation">Xではなくて is used to negate X, and then the correct information is supplied in the latter half of the sentence. An expression used for correction. In conversation, it becomes ...じゃなくて.</div></body></html>