<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>あたかも</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0014.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【あげる】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0016.xhtml">【あっての】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x856">【あたかも】</h1><h4 class="info">［あたかもN（であるか）の　ようだ］</h4><h4 class="info">［あたかもN（であるか）の　ごとし］</h4><h4 class="info">［あたかもVかの　ようだ］</h4><h4 class="info">［あたかもVかの　ごとし］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>その<ruby><rb>日</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby>はあたかも<ruby><rb>春</rb><rt>はる</rt></ruby>のような<ruby><rb>陽気</rb><rt>よう き</rt></ruby>だった。</span>／<span class="translation">That day was just like spring weather.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>人生</rb><rt>じん せい</rt></ruby>はあたかもはかなく<ruby><rb>消</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>える<ruby><rb>夢</rb><rt>ゆめ</rt></ruby>のごときものである。</span>／<span class="translation">Life is just like a dream that comes to nothing.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は、あたかも<ruby><rb>自分</rb><rt>じ ぶん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>会</rb><rt>かい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>中心</rb><rt>ちゅう しん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>人物</rb><rt>じん ぶつ</rt></ruby>であるかのように<ruby><rb>振</rb><rt>ふ</rt></ruby>る<ruby><rb>舞</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>っていた。</span>／<span class="translation">He behaved in the meeting as if he were the leader. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>はいつも、あたかも<ruby><rb>目</rb><rt>め</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>前</rb><rt>まえ</rt></ruby>にその<ruby><rb>光景</rb><rt>こう けい</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>浮</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>かび<ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>がってくるかのような<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はな</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>かた</rt></ruby>で、<ruby><rb>人々</rb><rt>ひと びと</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>魅了</rb><rt>み りょう</rt></ruby>する。</span>／<span class="translation">She always fascinates people, with her way of talking as if the scene will appear before one’s very eyes.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>その<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>は、あたかもファッション<ruby><rb>雑誌</rb><rt>ざっ し</rt></ruby>からそのまま<ruby><rb>抜</rb><rt>ぬ</rt></ruby>け<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>だ</rt></ruby>してきたかのような<ruby><rb>最新</rb><rt>さい しん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>流行</rb><rt>りゅう こう</rt></ruby>のファッションで<ruby><rb>全身</rb><rt>ぜん しん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>飾</rb><rt>かざ</rt></ruby>って、パーティーに<ruby><rb>現</rb><rt>あらわ</rt></ruby>れた。</span>／<span class="translation">That person—dressed from head to foot in the latest fashion—appeared at the party looking like she had just stepped out of a fashion magazine. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>大火事</rb><rt>おお か じ</rt></ruby>がおさまると、<ruby><rb>街</rb><rt>まち</rt></ruby>はあたかも<ruby><rb>空襲</rb><rt>くう しゅう</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>焼</rb><rt>や</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>払</rb><rt>はら</rt></ruby>われたかのごとく、ビルも<ruby><rb>家</rb><rt>いえ</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>跡形</rb><rt>あと かた</rt></ruby>もなく<ruby><rb>燃</rb><rt>も</rt></ruby>え<ruby><rb>尽</rb><rt>つ</rt></ruby>きてしまっていた。</span>／<span class="translation">After the big fire was under control, the city had been burned down as if in an air raid, with no trace of any buildings or houses left.  </span></div><div class="explanation">あたかも is used to explain a state by comparing it to another state, and it expresses that these states are very similar, although they are actually different. It is not used in casual spoken language, but in novels and other written language. まるで is used in spoken language, and ごとし, which conjugates as ごとき, ごとく, is literary language.  </div></body></html>