<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>とすれば2</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0593.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【とすれば<sub class="variation">1</sub>】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0595.xhtml">【とたん】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x56560">【とすれば<sub class="variation">2</sub>】</h1><div class="explanation">Formed by attaching すれば to the particle と. Refers to the preceding clause and means “if we assume that to be a fact,” “in the event that...occurs,” or “based on these facts/the present situation.” Used by the speaker to establish a set of hypothetical conditions and conveys the meaning “in the event that a certain assumption is made.” ば by itself does not have this meaning, so とすれば can hardly ever be replaced by ば.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x56576"><span class="number">1. </span>...とすれば〈not-yet-realized condition〉</h2><h4 class="info">［N／Na　だとすれば］</h4><h4 class="info">［A／V　とすれば］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>死</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>ぬとすれば 10 <ruby><rb>歳</rb><rt>さい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>年上</rb><rt>としうえ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>方</rb><rt>ほう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>早</rb><rt>はや</rt></ruby>いはずだ。</span>／<span class="translation">If one of us is going to die, then it’s bound to be me first, since I'm ten years older than you.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>台風</rb><rt>たい ふう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>上陸</rb><rt>じょう りく</rt></ruby>するとすれば、<ruby><rb>明日</rb><rt>あした</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>夜</rb><rt>よる</rt></ruby>になるでしょう。</span>／<span class="translation">If the typhoon does make landfall, it'll probably be tomorrow night. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>仮</rb><rt>かり</rt></ruby>に 20 <ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>にん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>るとすれば、この<ruby><rb>部屋</rb><rt>へ や</rt></ruby>ではちょっと<ruby><rb>狭</rb><rt>せま</rt></ruby>すぎるだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">If we assume that twenty people will come, this room will probably be a little too small. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>この<ruby><rb>結婚</rb><rt>けっ こん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>反対</rb><rt>はん たい</rt></ruby>する<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>がいるとすれば、それは<ruby><rb>一番</rb><rt>いち ばん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>身近</rb><rt>み ぢか</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>母親</rb><rt>はは おや</rt></ruby>である<ruby><rb>可能性</rb><rt>か のう せい</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>高</rb><rt>たか</rt></ruby>い。</span>／<span class="translation">If there’s going to be anyone who is against this marriage, then it’s most likely to be the person most closely related—the mother.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses a hypothetical condition. Means “if we assume that such-and-such is a fact” or “in the event that such-and-such occurs/exists,” although the speaker doesn’t actually know whether or not the thing in question is a fact or will occur. Sometimes accompanied by adverbials such as かりに (supposing that) or もし (if). Often followed by expressions that indicate a judgment on the part of the speaker, such as だろう (probably/likely) or はずだ (should/must be).</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x56620"><span class="number">2. </span>...とすれば〈already-realized condition〉</h2><h4 class="info">［N／Na　だとすれば］</h4><h4 class="info">［A／V　とすれば］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>これだけ<ruby><rb>待</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>っても<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>ないとすれば、もともと<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>る<ruby><rb>気</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>がなかったんじゃないだろうか。</span>／<span class="translation">If she hasn't come after we’ve waited this long, I’d say she probably never intended to come in the first place. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>我々</rb><rt>われ われ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>計画</rb><rt>けい かく</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>敵</rb><rt>てき</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>られていたとすれば、<ruby><rb>仲間</rb><rt>なか ま</rt></ruby>のだれかがもらしたことになる。</span>／<span class="translation">If our plans were known to the enemy, that means it was one of us that leaked them. </span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><span class="number">A:</span>この<ruby><rb>時間</rb><rt>じ かん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>容疑者</rb><rt>よう ぎ しゃ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>友人</rb><rt>ゆう じん</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>会</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>っていることが<ruby><rb>分</rb><rt>わ</rt></ruby>かっています。</span>／<span class="translation">We know that the suspect was meeting with a friend at this time. </span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>そうか。<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>にアリバイがあるとすれば、では、<ruby><rb>犯人</rb><rt>はん にん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>一体</rb><rt>いっ たい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>誰</rb><rt>だれ</rt></ruby>なのだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">Is that so? Well, if he’s got an alibi, then who the heck is the culprit?  </span></div><div class="explanation">Used when the speaker comes to the realization that something is true, based on the present situation or on information received from another party. Means “taking into account the current situation/facts,” or “if I were to make a judgment based on that....” Followed by an expression that indicates a judgment on the part of the speaker. かりに (supposing that) and もし (if) are not combined with this usage.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x56667"><span class="number">3. </span>（だ）とすれば</h2><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>家</rb><rt>いえ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>電話</rb><rt>でん わ</rt></ruby>しても<ruby><rb>誰</rb><rt>だれ</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>ないんですよ。</span>／<span class="translation">When I call home, nobody answers.  </span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>だとすれば、もうこちらに<ruby><rb>向</rb><rt>む</rt></ruby>かっているということじゃないですか。</span>／<span class="translation">If that’s the case, don't you think they're already on their way here?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>あの<ruby><rb>日</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>一日中</rb><rt>いち にち じゅう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>一緒</rb><rt>いっ しょ</rt></ruby>だったことが<ruby><rb>証明</rb><rt>しょう めい</rt></ruby>された。とすれば、<ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>にはアリバイがあるということになる。</span>／<span class="translation">It has been proven that, on that day, she was with him all day long. And if that is so, it means she has an alibi.  </span></div><div class="explanation">Refers to the previous sentence or a statement made by another person. Means “if that is a fact” or “if we assume that is correct.” Usage is the same as 2 above. A slightly formal expression. In ordinary conversation, expressions like だったら and そうなら are often used.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x56704"><span class="number">4. </span>NをNとすれば</h2><h3 class="subsubtitle" id="idsubsubtitlex1x56707"><span class="number">a. </span>NがNだとすれば</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>テレビを<ruby><rb>茶</rb><rt>ちゃ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>間</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>のものとすれば、ラジオは<ruby><rb>個室</rb><rt>こ しつ</rt></ruby>のものである。</span>／<span class="translation">If a television is something that goes in the living room (= shared space), then a radio is something that goes in a person’s room (= private space). </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>兄</rb><rt>あに</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>実業家</rb><rt>じつ ぎょう か</rt></ruby>タイプだとすれば、<ruby><rb>弟</rb><rt>おとうと</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>学者</rb><rt>がく しゃ</rt></ruby>タイプの<ruby><rb>性格</rb><rt>せい かく</rt></ruby>である。</span>／<span class="translation">If I were to say that my older brother is the entrepreneurial type, then my younger brother has the scholarly type of personality. </span></div><div class="explanation">This is a formulaic expression that contrasts two items. It means something like “if I (we) were to say that one of them is..., then I (we) can say that the other is....” It can be replaced by NがNなら(ば), as, for example, in 兄が実業家タイプなら(ば), 弟は学者タイプだ (If my older brother is the entrepreneurial type, then my younger brother is the scholarly type). It is not entirely impossible to use とすると and としたら with this pattern, but とすれば and なら are used most often. </div></body></html>