<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>なしに</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0685.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【なしでは...ない】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0687.xhtml">【なぜか】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x63189">【なしに】</h1><h4 class="info">［Nなしに］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>この<ruby><rb>山</rb><rt>やま</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>冬</rb><rt>ふゆ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>届</rb><rt>とど</rt></ruby>け<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>なしに<ruby><rb>登山</rb><rt>と ざん</rt></ruby>してはいけないことになっている。</span>／<span class="translation">This mountain is not to be climbed in winter without prior notification.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>断</rb><rt>ことわ</rt></ruby>りなしに<ruby><rb>外泊</rb><rt>がい はく</rt></ruby>したために、<ruby><rb>寮</rb><rt>りょう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>規則</rb><rt>き そく</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>一週間</rb><rt>いっ しゅう かん</rt></ruby>ロビーの<ruby><rb>掃除</rb><rt>そう じ</rt></ruby>をさせられた。</span>／<span class="translation">Because I stayed out overnight without permission, I had to clean the main foyer for a week, in accordance with dormitory regulations.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>前田</rb><rt>まえ だ</rt></ruby>さんは<ruby><rb>忙</rb><rt>いそが</rt></ruby>しい<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>だから<ruby><rb>約束</rb><rt>やく そく</rt></ruby>なしに<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>会</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>ったりしないでしょう。</span>／<span class="translation">Since Maeda-san is a busy man, he probably doesn’t see people without an appointment.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>研究会</rb><rt>けん きゅう かい</rt></ruby>では、<ruby><rb>前置</rb><rt>まえ お</rt></ruby>きなしにいきなり<ruby><rb>本題</rb><rt>ほん だい</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>はい</rt></ruby>らないように、<ruby><rb>皆</rb><rt>みな</rt></ruby>にわかりやすい<ruby><rb>発表</rb><rt>はっ ぴょう</rt></ruby>をこころがけてください。</span>／<span class="translation">At the research conference, don’t jump straight into the main topic without introduction; keep in mind that your presentation should be easy for everyone to follow.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>今度</rb><rt>こん ど</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>事務所</rb><rt>じ む しょ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>たアルバイトの<ruby><rb>高校生</rb><rt>こう こう せい</rt></ruby>はいい<ruby><rb>子</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>なのだが、いつもあいさつなしに<ruby><rb>帰</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>るので、いつ<ruby><rb>帰</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>ったかわからなくて<ruby><rb>困</rb><rt>こま</rt></ruby>る。</span>／<span class="translation">The new high school part-timer in our office is a good kid, but she always goes home without saying goodbye, so it’s a bit of a problem because we never know when she has left.</span></div><div class="explanation">When used with action nouns such as 届け出 (notification) or 断り (permission), なしに means doing something without having done the action expressed by the noun. It is often used in the sense of “do X without doing Y, which should of course have been done in advance.”</div><div class="explanation">When the noun is preceded by 何の, as in the example below, the particle も is inserted after the noun and Nなしに changes to 何のNもなしに.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（例）</span>彼は何の連絡もなしに突然たずねてきて、金の無心をした。／He showed up all of a sudden without contacting me in advance and asked for money. </div><div class="explanation">なしに is mainly a written expression. In spoken Japanese, しないで is used.</div></body></html>