<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ではなかったか</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0486.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ではないだろうか】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0488.xhtml">【ではなかろうか】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x44234">【ではなかったか】</h1><h4 class="info">［N／Na　（なの）ではなかったか］</h4><h4 class="info">［A／V　のではなかったか］</h4><div class="explanation">This is essentially a written language expression used to make conjectures about a past condition or to complain about a difference between the past and present. In spoken language, forms such as （ん）じゃなかったか (men) and （ん）じゃなかったの (women) are used.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x44253"><span class="number">1. </span>...（の）ではなかったか〈conjecture〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>古代人</rb><rt>こ だい じん</rt></ruby>にとってはこれも<ruby><rb>貴重</rb><rt>き ちょう</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>食物</rb><rt>しょく もつ</rt></ruby>ではなかったか。</span>／<span class="translation">Was this not also an important food for ancient peoples?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>昔</rb><rt>むかし</rt></ruby>はここもずいぶん<ruby><rb>閑静</rb><rt>かん せい</rt></ruby>だったのではなかったか。</span>／<span class="translation">Isn’t it true that a long time ago this place was extremely quiet?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>当時</rb><rt>とう じ</rt></ruby>のわが<ruby><rb>家</rb><rt>や</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>暮</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>らしは、かなり<ruby><rb>苦</rb><rt>くる</rt></ruby>しかったのではなかったか。</span>／<span class="translation">Wasn’t it true that our family was struggling financially at that time?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>当時</rb><rt>とう じ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>人々</rb><rt>ひと びと</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>人間</rb><rt>にん げん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>空</rb><rt>そら</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>飛</rb><rt>と</rt></ruby>ぶなどということは<ruby><rb>考</rb><rt>かんが</rt></ruby>えもしなかったのではなかったか。</span>／<span class="translation">I wouldn’t imagine that the people of that time ever thought humans would fly through the sky.</span></div><div class="explanation">An expression used to make a conjecture about something in the past. While it is similar to ...た（だ）ろう, the form ではなかったか conveys less conviction on the part of the speaker. With the exception of cases such as the one shown in (1), it usually follows the <i>ta</i>-form of a predicate and takes the form ...たのではなかったか. Essentially synonymous with ではなかっただろうか and ではなかったろうか.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x44296"><span class="number">2. </span>...（の）ではなかったか〈contrary to expectations〉</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>昔</rb><rt>むかし</rt></ruby>はとなり<ruby><rb>近所</rb><rt>きん じょ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>人々</rb><rt>ひと びと</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>互</rb><rt>たが</rt></ruby>いにもっと<ruby><rb>協力的</rb><rt>きょう りょく てき</rt></ruby>ではなかったか。</span>／<span class="translation">In the past, didn’t neighbors used to be much more cooperative with each other?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>あなたたちは<ruby><rb>規律</rb><rt>き りつ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>守</rb><rt>まも</rt></ruby>ると<ruby><rb>誓</rb><rt>ちか</rt></ruby>ったのではなかったか。</span>／<span class="translation">Didn’t you pledge to obey the regulations?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>これまでは<ruby><rb>平和</rb><rt>へい わ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>共存</rb><rt>きょう ぞん</rt></ruby>してきたのではなかったのか。</span>／<span class="translation">Haven’t they co-existed peacefully until now?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>これからは<ruby><rb>一家</rb><rt>いっ か</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>平和</rb><rt>へい わ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>暮</rb><rt>く</rt></ruby>らしていくのではなかったか。</span>／<span class="translation">Wasn’t it the intent of the family to live a peaceful life from now on?</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses to the listener a feeling of criticism, dissatisfaction, or regret regarding an undesirable state of affairs in the present that is different from the past. のではなかったか is used in written language. As in (3), it can also take the form ではなかったのか. When used with the dictionary form of a verb, as in (4), means “though something should have been done, in reality it wasn’t.”</div></body></html>