<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>ことになっている</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0228.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【ことにする】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0230.xhtml">【ことになる】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x18038">【ことになっている】</h1><h4 class="info">［Nということになっている］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-る　（という）ことになっている］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-ない　（という）ことになっている］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>やすむときは<ruby><rb>学校</rb><rt>がっ こう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>連絡</rb><rt>れん らく</rt></ruby>しなければならないことになっています。</span>／<span class="translation">There is a rule that you must contact the school when you are absent. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>乗車券</rb><rt>じょう しゃ けん</rt></ruby>をなくした<ruby><rb>場合</rb><rt>ば あい</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>最長</rb><rt>さい ちょう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>区間</rb><rt>く かん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>料金</rb><rt>りょう きん</rt></ruby>をいただくことになっているんですが。</span>／<span class="translation">I'm afraid that, when you’ve lost your train ticket, we have to ask you to pay the fare for the maximum distance.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>規則</rb><rt>き そく</rt></ruby>では、<ruby><rb>不正</rb><rt>ふ せい</rt></ruby>をおこなった<ruby><rb>場合</rb><rt>ば あい</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>失格</rb><rt>しっ かく</rt></ruby>ということになっている。</span>／<span class="translation">According to the regulations, when you commit an act of wrongdoing, you will be disqualified. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>駐車場</rb><rt>ちゅう しゃ じょう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>内</rb><rt>ない</rt></ruby>での<ruby><rb>盗難</rb><rt>とう なん</rt></ruby>や<ruby><rb>事故</rb><rt>じ こ</rt></ruby>については、<ruby><rb>駐車場</rb><rt>ちゅう しゃ じょう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>側</rb><rt>がわ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>関知</rb><rt>かん ち</rt></ruby>しないことになっております。</span>／<span class="translation">The parking lot management takes no responsibility for theft or accidents that take place inside the parking lot.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>パーティーに<ruby><rb>参加</rb><rt>さん か</rt></ruby>する<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>は、6<ruby><rb>時</rb><rt>じ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>駅</rb><rt>えき</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>待</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>ち<ruby><rb>合</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>わせることになっている。</span>／<span class="translation">Those who are going to attend the party are supposed to meet at the station at six o’clock. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>夏休</rb><rt>なつ やす</rt></ruby>みのあいだ、<ruby><rb>畑</rb><rt>はたけ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>水</rb><rt>みず</rt></ruby>やりは<ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>たちがすることになっている。</span>／<span class="translation">During summer vacation, it’s the children's job to water the garden.</span></div><div class="explanation">Indicates a variety of rules that govern people’s activities, including their plans, agreements in daily life, laws and rules, and even customs. Can be considered to mean that the conclusion or result of ...ことになる continues to have an effect. </div></body></html>