<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>なんて1</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0726.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【なんだろう】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0728.xhtml">【なんて<sub class="variation">2</sub>】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x68043">【なんて<sub class="variation">1</sub>】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x68046"><span class="number">1. </span>なんて</h2><h3 class="subsubtitle" id="idsubsubtitlex1x68049"><span class="number">a. </span>なんてV</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>よく<ruby><rb>聞</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>こえないのですが、あの<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>はなんて<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>っているのですか。</span>／<span class="translation">I can’t hear him very well—what is that person saying?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>この<ruby><rb>字</rb><rt>じ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>て<ruby><rb>書</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>いてあるのか<ruby><rb>分</rb><rt>わ</rt></ruby>からない。</span>／<span class="translation">I don’t know what this character means. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>このことを<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>ったら、お<ruby><rb>母</rb><rt>かあ</rt></ruby>さん<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>て<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>うかしら。</span>／<span class="translation">If she gets to know about it, how would my mother feel?</span></div><div class="explanation">Followed by a verb such as 言う(say) or 書く(write) and means that the content expressed by such a verb is unclear. A casual way of saying なんと.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x68080"><span class="number">b. </span>なんて（いう）N</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>さっき<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>た<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>はなんていう<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>ですか。</span>／<span class="translation">What is the name of the person who came here just now?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>後藤</rb><rt>ご とう</rt></ruby>さんは<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>ていう<ruby><rb>会社</rb><rt>かい しゃ</rt></ruby>にお<ruby><rb>勤</rb><rt>つと</rt></ruby>めですか。</span>／<span class="translation">What is the name of the company where Goto-san works?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>あの<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>、なんて<ruby><rb>名前</rb><rt>な まえ</rt></ruby>だったかしら。</span>／<span class="translation">I wonder what the name of that person was.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>、なんて<ruby><rb>町</rb><rt>まち</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>住</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>んでいるんだっけ。</span>／<span class="translation">What is the name of the town he lives in again?</span></div><div class="explanation">Used to ask for a name of a person or a place. A casual way of saying なんというN.</div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x68117"><span class="number">c. </span>なんて（いう）Nだ</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>あなたって<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>は、なんていう<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>なの。</span>／<span class="translation">What kind of person are you?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>あれだけの<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>を1<ruby><rb>日</rb><rt>にち</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>片</rb><rt>かた</rt></ruby>づけてしまうなんて、<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>ていう<ruby><rb>早業</rb><rt>はや わざ</rt></ruby>だろう。</span>／<span class="translation">To finish that whole job in just one day—what a quick worker!</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>事故</rb><rt>じ こ</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>失</rb><rt>うしな</rt></ruby>ってしまうなんて、なんて<ruby><rb>事</rb><rt>こと</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">I can’t imagine what it’s like to lose a child in an accident.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>友人</rb><rt>ゆう じん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>見殺</rb><rt>み ごろ</rt></ruby>しにするなんて、あなたってなんて<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>なの。</span>／<span class="translation">What kind of person are you just to stand by and not help a friend?</span></div><div class="explanation">A casual way of saying なんというNだ. Expresses the speaker’s extreme surprise or amazement. </div><h3 class="subsubtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubsubtitlex1x68154"><span class="number">d. </span>なんてことない</h3><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>これくらいのけが、なんて<ruby><rb>事</rb><rt>こと</rt></ruby>ないさ。</span>／<span class="translation">Such an injury is nothing to me. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>この<ruby><rb>程度</rb><rt>てい ど</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>て<ruby><rb>事</rb><rt>こと</rt></ruby>ない。1<ruby><rb>日</rb><rt>にち</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>片付</rb><rt>かた づ</rt></ruby>くさ。</span>／<span class="translation">It’s no problem to do such a job. I can finish it in a day. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>一見</rb><rt>いっ けん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>て<ruby><rb>事</rb><rt>こと</rt></ruby>ない<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>のようだけれど、やってみると<ruby><rb>非常</rb><rt>ひ じょう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>手</rb><rt>て</rt></ruby>がかかる。</span>／<span class="translation">This work looks easy at first, but when you actually do it, it’s really time-consuming.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means that something is not so considerable. This is a casual way of saying なんということはない.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x68185"><span class="number">2. </span>なんて...んだろう</h2><h4 class="info">［なんて...Nなんだろう］</h4><h4 class="info">［なんてNa なんだろう］</h4><h4 class="info">［なんてA-いんだろう］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>ここはなんて<ruby><rb>寂</rb><rt>さび</rt></ruby>しいところなんでしょう。</span>／<span class="translation">What a god-forsaken place this is!</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>演奏</rb><rt>えん そう</rt></ruby>はなんてすばらしいんだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">How excellent his performance is!</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>この<ruby><rb>子</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>てかわいげのない<ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>なんだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">What a charmless, unendearing child!</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>家</rb><rt>いえ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>中</rb><rt>なか</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>木</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>植</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>えるとは、<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>て<ruby><rb>大胆</rb><rt>だい たん</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>発想</rb><rt>はっ そう</rt></ruby>なんだろう。</span>／<span class="translation">What a bold idea, to plant a tree inside the house!</span></div><div class="explanation">なんて...んだろう is used to express the speaker’s surprise or amazement with admiration or explanation. It can be rephrased as なんてまあ. なんて...んだろう is a casual way of saying なんと...のだろう.</div></body></html>