<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>べつとして</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0922.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【べつだん】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0924.xhtml">【べつに】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x85638">【べつとして】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x85640"><span class="number">1. </span>Nはべつとして</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>中国語</rb><rt>ちゅう ごく ご</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>別</rb><rt>べつ</rt></ruby>として、そのほかのアジアの<ruby><rb>言語</rb><rt>げん ご</rt></ruby>となると<ruby><rb>学習</rb><rt>がく しゅう</rt></ruby>する<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>極端</rb><rt>きょく たん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>少</rb><rt>すく</rt></ruby>なくなる。</span>／<span class="translation">Besides Chinese, very few people are now studying any other Asian languages.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>京都</rb><rt>きょう と</rt></ruby>や<ruby><rb>奈良</rb><rt>な ら</rt></ruby>といった<ruby><rb>観光地</rb><rt>かん こう ち</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>別</rb><rt>べつ</rt></ruby>として、<ruby><rb>小</rb><rt>ちい</rt></ruby>さい<ruby><rb>寺</rb><rt>てら</rt></ruby>や<ruby><rb>神社</rb><rt>じん じゃ</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>観光</rb><rt>かん こう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>収入</rb><rt>しゅう にゅう</rt></ruby>はないのが<ruby><rb>普通</rb><rt>ふ つう</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">Apart from tourist sites such as Kyoto and Nara, small temples and shrines tend not to get any revenue from tourism.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>中国</rb><rt>ちゅう ごく</rt></ruby>での<ruby><rb>生活</rb><rt>せい かつ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>長</rb><rt>なが</rt></ruby>かった<ruby><rb>西田</rb><rt>にし だ</rt></ruby>さんは<ruby><rb>別</rb><rt>べつ</rt></ruby>として、うちの<ruby><rb>会社</rb><rt>かい しゃ</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>他</rb><rt>ほか</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>中国語</rb><rt>ちゅう ごく ご</rt></ruby>のできる<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>はいない。</span>／<span class="translation">Apart from Nishida-san who lived in China for a long time, there is no one else in my company who can speak Chinese.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “except something” or “something is special.” Alternatively, べつにして (putting ... aside) is used.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x85671"><span class="number">2. </span>...はべつとして</h2><h4 class="info">［...かどうかはべつとして］</h4><h4 class="info">［疑問詞+かはべつとして］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>将来</rb><rt>しょう らい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>役</rb><rt>やく</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>立</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>つかどうかは<ruby><rb>別</rb><rt>べつ</rt></ruby>として、<ruby><rb>学生</rb><rt>がく せい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>時代</rb><rt>じ だい</rt></ruby>にいろいろな<ruby><rb>分野</rb><rt>ぶん や</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>勉強</rb><rt>べん きょう</rt></ruby>をしておくことは、けっして<ruby><rb>無駄</rb><rt>む だ</rt></ruby>ではない。</span>／<span class="translation">Regardless of whether or not they will become useful in the future, it is not a waste of time to study in a variety of fields while one is a student.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>実現</rb><rt>じつ げん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>可能</rb><rt>か のう</rt></ruby>かどうかは<ruby><rb>別</rb><rt>べつ</rt></ruby>として、この<ruby><rb>計画</rb><rt>けい かく</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>一度</rb><rt>いち ど</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>検討</rb><rt>けん とう</rt></ruby>してみる<ruby><rb>価値</rb><rt>か ち</rt></ruby>はあると<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>う。</span>／<span class="translation">Putting aside whether it is realizable or not, this plan is worth evaluating.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>だれが<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ったかは<ruby><rb>別</rb><rt>べつ</rt></ruby>として、<ruby><rb>今回</rb><rt>こん かい</rt></ruby>のような<ruby><rb>発言</rb><rt>はつ げん</rt></ruby>がでてくる<ruby><rb>背景</rb><rt>はい けい</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>根深</rb><rt>ね ぶか</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>偏見</rb><rt>へん けん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>存在</rb><rt>そん ざい</rt></ruby>すると<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>われる。</span>／<span class="translation">No matter who may have said it, the fact that such an opinion is expressed indicates that there are deep-rooted prejudices amongst us.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means that something is put aside for the time being. Alternatively, べつにして may be used.</div></body></html>