<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>じゃないが</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0277.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【じゃないか<sub class="variation">2</sub>】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0279.xhtml">【じゃないだろうか】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x21921">【じゃないが】</h1><h4 class="info">［Nじゃないが］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>非難</rb><rt>ひ なん</rt></ruby>するわけじゃないけど、どうしてあなたの<ruby><rb>部屋</rb><rt>へ や</rt></ruby>はこんなに<ruby><rb>散</rb><rt>ち</rt></ruby>らかっているの。</span>／<span class="translation">I don’t mean to criticize, but why is your room so messy? </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>悪口</rb><rt>わる ぐち</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>いたいわけじゃないけど、あの<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>、このごろ<ruby><rb>付</rb><rt>つ</rt></ruby>き<ruby><rb>合</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>いがわるいんだよ。</span>／<span class="translation">I don’t mean to speak ill of him, but that man really isn’t very sociable these days.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>疑</rb><rt>うたが</rt></ruby>うわけじゃありませんが、きのう1<ruby><rb>日</rb><rt>にち</rt></ruby>どこにいたのか<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はな</rt></ruby>してください。</span>／<span class="translation">It’s not that I doubt you, but please tell me where you were all day yesterday.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>自慢</rb><rt>じ まん</rt></ruby>じゃないが、<ruby><rb>息子</rb><rt>むすこ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>今年</rb><rt>ことし</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>東大</rb><rt>とう だい</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>はい</rt></ruby>ってね。</span>／<span class="translation">I don’t want to brag, but my son got into Tokyo University this year.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>あっ、それはおめでとうございます。</span>／<span class="translation">Oh, congratulations on that! </span></div><div class="explanation">Means “don’t intend to..., but....” Used as an introductory remark to soften the statement or question that follows. Example (4) is an idiomatic expression.</div></body></html>