<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>たびに</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0399.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【たび】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0401.xhtml">【たぶん】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x32289">【たびに】</h1><h4 class="info">［Nのたびに］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-るたびに］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>健康診断</rb><rt>けん こう しん だん</rt></ruby>のたびに、<ruby><rb>太</rb><rt>ふと</rt></ruby>りすぎだと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>われる。</span>／<span class="translation">Every time I have a check-up, I’m told that I’m too fat.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>山</rb><rt>やま</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>くたびに<ruby><rb>雨</rb><rt>あめ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>降</rb><rt>ふ</rt></ruby>られる。</span>／<span class="translation">Every time I go to the mountains, I get rained on.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>父</rb><rt>ちち</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>出張</rb><rt>しゅっ ちょう</rt></ruby>のたびにかならずその<ruby><rb>土地</rb><rt>と ち</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>土産</rb><rt>みやげ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>ってくる。</span>／<span class="translation">My father always makes sure to buy us local souvenirs every time he goes on a business trip.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>ふるさとは<ruby><rb>帰</rb><rt>かえ</rt></ruby>るたびに<ruby><rb>変</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>わっていって、<ruby><rb>昔</rb><rt>むかし</rt></ruby>ののどかな<ruby><rb>風景</rb><rt>ふう けい</rt></ruby>がだんだんなくなっていく。</span>／<span class="translation">I see changes in my hometown every time I go back, and the tranquil scenery of the old days is gradually disappearing.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>会</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>うたびにちがうメガネをかけている。</span>／<span class="translation">She’s wearing a different pair of glasses every time I see her.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span>この<ruby><rb>写真</rb><rt>しゃ しん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>るたびにむかしを<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>だ</rt></ruby>す。</span>／<span class="translation">Every time I look at this photo, I recall the past.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “each time,” “every time I do...I always....”</div></body></html>