<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>たり</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0409.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【たらどうか】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0411.xhtml">【たりとも】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x34583">【たり】</h1><h4 class="info">［N／Na　だったり］</h4><h4 class="info">［A-かったり］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-たり］</h4><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x34591"><span class="number">1. </span>...たり...たりする</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>休</rb><rt>やす</rt></ruby>みの<ruby><rb>日</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby>には、ビデオを<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>たり<ruby><rb>音楽</rb><rt>おん がく</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>聞</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>いたりしてのんびり<ruby><rb>過</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>ごすのが<ruby><rb>好</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>きです。</span>／<span class="translation">On my day off I like to relax―watching videos or listening to music.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>コピーをとったり、ワープロを<ruby><rb>打</rb><rt>う</rt></ruby>ったり、<ruby><rb>今日</rb><rt>きょう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>一日中</rb><rt>いち にち じゅう</rt></ruby>いそがしかった。</span>／<span class="translation">I was busy all day today with photocopying and typing.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>きくなって<ruby><rb>家族</rb><rt>か ぞく</rt></ruby>がそろうことはめったにないのですが、<ruby><rb>年</rb><rt>ねん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>数回</rb><rt>すう かい</rt></ruby>はいっしょに<ruby><rb>食事</rb><rt>しょく じ</rt></ruby>したりします。</span>／<span class="translation">My children have grown up so we seldom have the opportunity for the family to get together, but we do things like get together for dinner a couple times a year.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>給料日</rb><rt>きゅう りょう び</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>前</rb><rt>まえ</rt></ruby>には<ruby><rb>昼食</rb><rt>ちゅう しょく</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>抜</rb><rt>ぬ</rt></ruby>いたりすることもある。</span>／<span class="translation">I sometimes skip lunch on the day before payday.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>アルバイトで<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>ている<ruby><rb>学生</rb><rt>がく せい</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>曜日</rb><rt>よう び</rt></ruby>によって<ruby><rb>男子</rb><rt>だん し</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>学生</rb><rt>がく せい</rt></ruby>だったり<ruby><rb>女子</rb><rt>じょ し</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>学生</rb><rt>がく せい</rt></ruby>だったりしますが、みなよく<ruby><rb>働</rb><rt>はたら</rt></ruby>いてくれます。</span>／<span class="translation">Depending on the day, we can have men or women students working part-time, but they all work hard for us.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>絵</rb><rt>え</rt></ruby>のモチーフは<ruby><rb>鳥</rb><rt>とり</rt></ruby>だったり<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>だったりするが<ruby><rb>一貫</rb><rt>いっ かん</rt></ruby>して<ruby><rb>現代人</rb><rt>げん だい じん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>不安</rb><rt>ふ あん</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>描</rb><rt>えが</rt></ruby>かれている。</span>／<span class="translation">Her paintings’ motifs may be persons or birds or whatever, but there’s always a common depiction of present-day anxiety.</span></div><div class="explanation">Points out two or three representative acts among several. There are also cases where only one example is pointed out, but it implies that other examples exist too, as in (3) and (4). The verb at the end of the sentence has たりするattached when the sentence ends with this pattern, as in ...たり...たりします／しました.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（×）</span>きのうの休みにはビデオを見たり、散歩したり、手紙を書きました。／On the holiday yesterday I did things like watching videos, walking, and I wrote a letter.</div><div class="explanation type"><span class="type">（○）</span>きのうの休みにはビデオを見たり、散歩したり、手紙を書いたりしました。／On the holiday yesterday I did things like watching videos, walking, and writing a letter.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x34658"><span class="number">2. </span>...たり...たり</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なに</rt></ruby>か<ruby><rb>心配</rb><rt>しん ぱい</rt></ruby>なことでもあるのか<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>腕組</rb><rt>うで ぐみ</rt></ruby>をして<ruby><rb>廊下</rb><rt>ろう か</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ったり<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>たりしている。</span>／<span class="translation">I don’t know if he’s worried about something, but he’s pacing up and down the corridor with his arms folded.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>去年</rb><rt>きょ ねん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>秋</rb><rt>あき</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>暑</rb><rt>あつ</rt></ruby>かったり<ruby><rb>寒</rb><rt>さむ</rt></ruby>かったりして<ruby><rb>秋</rb><rt>あき</rt></ruby>らしい<ruby><rb>日</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>少</rb><rt>すく</rt></ruby>なかった。</span>／<span class="translation">Last fall was sometimes hot and sometimes cold, without any real fall-like days.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>父</rb><rt>ちち</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>近頃</rb><rt>ちか ごろ</rt></ruby>あまり<ruby><rb>具合</rb><rt>ぐ あ</rt></ruby>いがよくなく、<ruby><rb>寝</rb><rt>ね</rt></ruby>たり<ruby><rb>起</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>きたりだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Father has not been very well lately, lying down and getting up again and again.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>薬</rb><rt>くすり</rt></ruby>はきちんと<ruby><rb>飲</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>まなければいけない。<ruby><rb>飲</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>んだり<ruby><rb>飲</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>まなかったりでは<ruby><rb>効果</rb><rt>こう か</rt></ruby>がない。</span>／<span class="translation">Medicine has to be taken properly; it has no effect if just taken sporadically.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>くつを<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>おうと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>うが、いいと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>うと<ruby><rb>高</rb><rt>たか</rt></ruby>すぎたり、サイズがあわなかったりで、なかなか<ruby><rb>気</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ったのが<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>つからない。</span>／<span class="translation">I want to buy a pair of shoes, but when I find a pair that I like they’re too expensive or the size doesn’t fit, so I just haven’t been able to get a pair that I like.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span>あすは<ruby><rb>山間部</rb><rt>さん かん ぶ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>晴</rb><rt>は</rt></ruby>れたり<ruby><rb>曇</rb><rt>くも</rt></ruby>ったりの<ruby><rb>天気</rb><rt>てん き</rt></ruby>でしょう。</span>／<span class="translation">Tomorrow the mountains will be occasionally sunny and occasionally cloudy.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses a situation where a state or an act alternates repeatedly or there are two contrasting situations. Other expressions frequently used for contrasting situations include あったりなかったり (sometimes exists, and sometimes does not), 上がったり下がったり (going up and down), 泣いたり笑ったり (crying and laughing), 乗ったり降りたり (getting on and off), and 出たり入ったり (coming/going in and out).</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x34707"><span class="number">3. </span>...たり　したら／しては</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>英語</rb><rt>えい ご</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>生活</rb><rt>せい かつ</rt></ruby>にもずいぶん<ruby><rb>慣</rb><rt>な</rt></ruby>れたが、<ruby><rb>早口</rb><rt>はや くち</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はな</rt></ruby>しかけられたりしたらわからなくて<ruby><rb>困</rb><rt>こま</rt></ruby>ることも<ruby><rb>多</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>い。</span>／<span class="translation">I’ve gotten pretty well used to living with English, but when people speak to me very quickly, I can often have problems.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>その<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>のいないところで<ruby><rb>悪口</rb><rt>わる ぐち</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ったりしてはいけない。</span>／<span class="translation">One mustn’t say bad things about a person when he is not around.</span></div><div class="explanation">Implies that there are other instances as well. Example (2) has almost the same meaning as 悪口を言ったらいけない, but the expression is softened by not saying the complete form. </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x34732"><span class="number">4. </span>...たりして</h2><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>変</rb><rt>へん</rt></ruby>だね、まだだれも<ruby><rb>来</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>てないよ。</span>／<span class="translation">That’s strange—no one’s come yet.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span><ruby><rb>約束</rb><rt>やく そく</rt></ruby>、あしただったりして。</span>／<span class="translation">Maybe the appointment is tomorrow?</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>佐野</rb><rt>さ の</rt></ruby>さん、<ruby><rb>遅</rb><rt>おそ</rt></ruby>いわね。</span>／<span class="translation">Sano-san is late.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>ひとりだけ<ruby><rb>先</rb><rt>さき</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ってたりして。</span>／<span class="translation">Could she have already gone ahead by herself?</span></div><div class="explanation">This is a way of focusing on one example. Implies that there are other possibilities, and is used when avoiding saying something directly. An indirect, bantering expression. Often used in colloquial speech by young people. </div></body></html>