<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>しゅんかん</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0280.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【じゅう】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0282.xhtml">【じょう】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x22103">【しゅんかん】</h1><h4 class="info">［Nのしゅんかん］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-たしゅんかん］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>立</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>ち<ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>がった<ruby><rb>瞬間</rb><rt>しゅん かん</rt></ruby>に、<ruby><rb>家</rb><rt>いえ</rt></ruby>がぐらっと<ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>きく<ruby><rb>揺</rb><rt>ゆ</rt></ruby>れた。</span>／<span class="translation">The moment I stood up, the house shook violently from side to side. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>王子様</rb><rt>おう じ さま</rt></ruby>が、<ruby><rb>眠</rb><rt>ねむ</rt></ruby>っているお<ruby><rb>姫様</rb><rt>ひめ さま</rt></ruby>にキスしたその<ruby><rb>瞬間</rb><rt>しゅん かん</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>魔法</rb><rt>ま ほう</rt></ruby>がとけた。</span>／<span class="translation">The moment the prince kissed the sleeping princess, the spell was broken. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>試験</rb><rt>し けん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>落</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>ちたことがわかった<ruby><rb>瞬間</rb><rt>しゅん かん</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>目</rb><rt>め</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>前</rb><rt>まえ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>真</rb><rt>ま</rt></ruby>っ<ruby><rb>暗</rb><rt>くら</rt></ruby>になって<ruby><rb>血</rb><rt>ち</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>気</rb><rt>け</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>引</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby>いていくのが<ruby><rb>自分</rb><rt>じ ぶん</rt></ruby>でもわかった。</span>／<span class="translation">The moment I realized I had failed the exam, everything went dark in front of my eyes and I was aware of the color draining from my face.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>これが<ruby><rb>誕生</rb><rt>たん じょう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>瞬間</rb><rt>しゅん かん</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">This is the moment of birth. </span></div><div class="explanation">Means “right at that time.” Seldom attaches to nouns. In spoken language, V-たとたん is used. </div></body></html>