<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>うえ</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0075.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【いわゆる】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0077.xhtml">【うち】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x6871">【うえ】</h1><h2 class="subtitle" id="idsubtitlex1x6873"><span class="number">1. </span>Nのうえで（は）</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>暦</rb><rt>こよみ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>うえ</rt></ruby>ではもう<ruby><rb>春</rb><rt>はる</rt></ruby>だというのに、まだまだ<ruby><rb>寒</rb><rt>さむ</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>日</rb><rt>ひ</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>続</rb><rt>つづ</rt></ruby>いている。</span>／<span class="translation">It is still cold, even though it is already spring according to the calendar. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>データの<ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>うえ</rt></ruby>では<ruby><rb>視聴率</rb><rt>し ちょう りつ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>急上昇</rb><rt>きゅう じょう しょう</rt></ruby>しているが、<ruby><rb>周</rb><rt>まわ</rt></ruby>りの<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>聞</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>いても<ruby><rb>誰</rb><rt>だれ</rt></ruby>もそんな<ruby><rb>番組</rb><rt>ばん ぐみ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>らないと<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>う。</span>／<span class="translation">The data show that the ratings for this TV program are skyrocketing, but when I ask people I know about it, they say they’ve never heard of it.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>その<ruby><rb>公園</rb><rt>こう えん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>地図</rb><rt>ち ず</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>うえ</rt></ruby>では<ruby><rb>近</rb><rt>ちか</rt></ruby>くてすぐ<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>けそうに<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>えるが、<ruby><rb>実</rb><rt>じつ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>坂</rb><rt>さか</rt></ruby>がたくさんあってかなり<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>きにくい<ruby><rb>場所</rb><rt>ば しょ</rt></ruby>なのだ。</span>／<span class="translation">That park looks close and easy to get to on the map, but actually there are lots of hills, so it’s not a place you can get to easily. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>間取</rb><rt>ま ど</rt></ruby>りは<ruby><rb>図面</rb><rt>ず めん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>うえ</rt></ruby>でしか<ruby><rb>確認</rb><rt>かく にん</rt></ruby>できなかったが、すぐにそのマンションを<ruby><rb>借</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>りることに<ruby><rb>決</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>めた。</span>／<span class="translation">I decided immediately to rent this apartment, even though I was only able to check the layout by looking at the floor plan. </span></div><div class="explanation">When うえで follows a noun that refers to something in written form, such as data or a map, it means “according to that information.”</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x6910"><span class="number">2. </span>V-るうえで</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>パソコンを<ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>う<ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>うえ</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>注意</rb><rt>ちゅう い</rt></ruby>しなければならないことは<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なん</rt></ruby>ですか。</span>／<span class="translation">What do we have to be careful about when buying a computer?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>このプロジェクトを<ruby><rb>進</rb><rt>すす</rt></ruby>めていく<ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>うえ</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>障害</rb><rt>しょう がい</rt></ruby>となるのが、<ruby><rb>地元</rb><rt>じ もと</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>住民</rb><rt>じゅう みん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>反対</rb><rt>はん たい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>運動</rb><rt>うん どう</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">One obstacle to proceeding with this project is the opposition movement among local residents.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>女性</rb><rt>じょ せい</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>結婚</rb><rt>けっ こん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>相手</rb><rt>あい て</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>選</rb><rt>えら</rt></ruby>ぶ<ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>うえ</rt></ruby>での<ruby><rb>重要</rb><rt>じゅう よう</rt></ruby>なポイントとして、「<ruby><rb>三高</rb><rt>さん こう</rt></ruby>」ということが<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>われていた。</span>／<span class="translation">It used to be said there were “three highs” (three important points) for women when choosing a marriage partner. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>留学生</rb><rt>りゅう がく せい</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>実際</rb><rt>じっ さい</rt></ruby>にホームステイさせる<ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>うえ</rt></ruby>で、おそらく<ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>までに<ruby><rb>予想</rb><rt>よ そう</rt></ruby>もしなかった<ruby><rb>問題</rb><rt>もん だい</rt></ruby>がいろいろ<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>てくるものと<ruby><rb>思</rb><rt>おも</rt></ruby>われますので、そのための<ruby><rb>相談</rb><rt>そう だん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>窓口</rb><rt>まど ぐち</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>設</rb><rt>もう</rt></ruby>けました。</span>／<span class="translation">When we actually place foreign students with homestay families, it’s possible that a variety of unforeseen problems may arise, so we’ve set up a counseling service to deal with them.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “in the case of/in the process of doing something.” Used to describe a problem or point to be aware of. </div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x6947"><span class="number">3. </span>V-たうえで</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>では、<ruby><rb>担当</rb><rt>たん とう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>者</rb><rt>もの</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>相談</rb><rt>そう だん</rt></ruby>した<ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>うえ</rt></ruby>で、<ruby><rb>改</rb><rt>あらた</rt></ruby>めてご<ruby><rb>返事</rb><rt>へん じ</rt></ruby>させていただきます。</span>／<span class="translation">Well then, after speaking to the person in charge, I’ll contact you again.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>一応</rb><rt>いち おう</rt></ruby>ご<ruby><rb>両親</rb><rt>りょう しん</rt></ruby>にお<ruby><rb>話</rb><rt>はな</rt></ruby>しなさった<ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>うえ</rt></ruby>で、ゆっくり<ruby><rb>考</rb><rt>かんが</rt></ruby>えていただいてけっこうです。</span>／<span class="translation">At any rate, after you’ve talked to your parents, you can take some time to think about it.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>金</rb><rt>かね</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>貸</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>してやると<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ったのは、お<ruby><rb>前</rb><rt>まえ</rt></ruby>がちゃんと<ruby><rb>職</rb><rt>しょく</rt></ruby>についてまともな<ruby><rb>生活</rb><rt>せい かつ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>戻</rb><rt>もど</rt></ruby>った<ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>うえ</rt></ruby>でのことだ。<ruby><rb>働</rb><rt>はたら</rt></ruby>かないで<ruby><rb>遊</rb><rt>あそ</rt></ruby>んでばかりいるやつに<ruby><rb>金</rb><rt>かね</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>貸</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>すわけにはいかない。</span>／<span class="translation">When I said I’d lend you the money, I meant I'd give it to you if you found a regular job and went back to a proper lifestyle. I can’t lend money to a guy who doesn't work for a living and just fools around all the time.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “first do the action indicated by the verb.” Followed by an expression that means “do the next action, based on the result of the first.”</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x6978"><span class="number">4. </span>V-る／V-た　うえは</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>やると<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>ってしまったうえは、<ruby><rb>何</rb><rt>なに</rt></ruby>がなんでもやらなければならない。</span>／<span class="translation">Since I said I’ll do it, I have to do it no matter what.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>留学</rb><rt>りゅう がく</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>決心</rb><rt>けっ しん</rt></ruby>した<ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>うえ</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>少々</rb><rt>しょう しょう</rt></ruby>のことがあっても<ruby><rb>一人</rb><rt>ひとり</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>乗</rb><rt>の</rt></ruby>り<ruby><rb>越</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>えていけるだけの<ruby><rb>強</rb><rt>つよ</rt></ruby>さを<ruby><rb>養</rb><rt>やしな</rt></ruby>ってほしい。</span>／<span class="translation">Since you have decided to study abroad, I want you to develop the strength to overcome any little difficulties you may encounter, on your own.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>みんなに<ruby><rb>期待</rb><rt>き たい</rt></ruby>されて<ruby><rb>出馬</rb><rt>しゅつ ば</rt></ruby>する<ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>うえ</rt></ruby>は、どんなことがあっても<ruby><rb>当選</rb><rt>とう せん</rt></ruby>しなければならない。</span>／<span class="translation">When I run for election, as everyone expects, no matter what happens, I must get elected.  </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>他</rb><rt>ほか</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>仲間</rb><rt>なか ま</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>押</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>しのけてレギュラーメンバーになる<ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>うえ</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>必</rb><rt>かなら</rt></ruby>ず<ruby><rb>得点</rb><rt>とく てん</rt></ruby>してチームに<ruby><rb>貢献</rb><rt>こう けん</rt></ruby>してみせる。</span>／<span class="translation">Now that I have pushed other members out of the way to become a regular, I am determined to make a contribution to the team by scoring points. </span></div><div class="explanation">うえは follows words that express an act involving some kind of responsibility or resolution and means “because one does/did such-and-such an act.” Followed by an expression that means “based on that, one must take appropriate action.” Same as …からには and …以上は. A formal expression.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x7015"><span class="number">5. </span>...うえ（に）</h2><h4 class="info">［Nであるうえに］</h4><h4 class="info">［Na なうえに］</h4><h4 class="info">［A／V　うえに］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>今年</rb><rt>ことし</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>冷夏</rb><rt>れい か</rt></ruby>である<ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>うえ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>台風</rb><rt>たい ふう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>被害</rb><rt>ひ がい</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>きくて、<ruby><rb>野菜</rb><rt>や さい</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>異常</rb><rt>い じょう</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>高値</rb><rt>たか ね</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>記録</rb><rt>き ろく</rt></ruby>している。</span>／<span class="translation">It’s been a cold summer, and in addition, there’s been a lot of damage from typhoons this year, so vegetable prices have been unusually high. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>彼女</rb><rt>かの じょ</rt></ruby>は、<ruby><rb>就職</rb><rt>しゅう しょく</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>失敗</rb><rt>しっ ぱい</rt></ruby>した<ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>うえ</rt></ruby>、つきあっていた<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>にもふられて、とても<ruby><rb>落</rb><rt>お</rt></ruby>ち<ruby><rb>込</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>んでいた。</span>／<span class="translation">She was very depressed about failing to find a job, and on top of that, the person she was going out with broke up with her.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>その<ruby><rb>選手</rb><rt>せん しゅ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>日本</rb><rt>に ほん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>記録</rb><rt>き ろく</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>更新</rb><rt>こう しん</rt></ruby>した<ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>うえ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>銀</rb><rt>ぎん</rt></ruby>メダルももらって、<ruby><rb>自分</rb><rt>じ ぶん</rt></ruby>でも<ruby><rb>信</rb><rt>しん</rt></ruby>じられないという<ruby><rb>顔</rb><rt>かお</rt></ruby>をしていた。</span>／<span class="translation">After he set a new Japanese record and, in addition, won a silver medal, the athlete looked like he himself could not believe it. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>博士</rb><rt>はかせ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>号</rb><rt>ごう</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>持</rb><rt>も</rt></ruby>っている<ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>うえ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>教育</rb><rt>きょう いく</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>経験</rb><rt>けい けん</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>長</rb><rt>なが</rt></ruby>い。<ruby><rb>周囲</rb><rt>しゅう い</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>信頼</rb><rt>しん らい</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>厚</rb><rt>あつ</rt></ruby>く<ruby><rb>教師</rb><rt>きょう し</rt></ruby>としては<ruby><rb>申</rb><rt>もう</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>分</rb><rt>ぶん</rt></ruby>のない<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">Along with a doctorate, he has a long career in teaching, too. He is also highly trusted by those around him, so he is perfect as a teacher.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span>その<ruby><rb>壁画</rb><rt>へき が</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>保存</rb><rt>ほ ぞん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>状態</rb><rt>じょう たい</rt></ruby>がいい<ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>うえ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>図柄</rb><rt>ず がら</rt></ruby>もこれまでにない<ruby><rb>大胆</rb><rt>だい たん</rt></ruby>なもので、<ruby><rb>考古学者</rb><rt>こう こ がく しゃ</rt></ruby>たちの<ruby><rb>注目</rb><rt>ちゅう もく</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>的</rb><rt>まと</rt></ruby>となっている。</span>／<span class="translation">That mural is well-preserved, and besides, the pattern is bold and unlike any other found to date, so it has become the focus of archeologists’ attention.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>今年</rb><rt>ことし</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>冷夏</rb><rt>れい か</rt></ruby>であり、そのうえ<ruby><rb>台風</rb><rt>たい ふう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>被害</rb><rt>ひ がい</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>きくて、<ruby><rb>野菜</rb><rt>や さい</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>異常</rb><rt>い じょう</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>高値</rb><rt>たか ね</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>記録</rb><rt>き ろく</rt></ruby>している。</span>／<span class="translation">It’s been a cold summer, and in addition, there’s been a lot of damage from typhoons this year, so vegetable prices have been unusually high. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（7）</span>このあたりは<ruby><rb>閑静</rb><rt>かん せい</rt></ruby>なうえに、<ruby><rb>駅</rb><rt>えき</rt></ruby>にも<ruby><rb>近</rb><rt>ちか</rt></ruby>く<ruby><rb>住環境</rb><rt>じゅう かん きょう</rt></ruby>としては<ruby><rb>申</rb><rt>もう</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>分</rb><rt>ぶん</rt></ruby>ない。</span>／<span class="translation">This is perfect area to live in, as it is quiet and close to the station. </span></div><div class="explanation">うえ（に）indicates that a certain state or event coincides with or happens in addition to another state or event. When it is used after a noun, the noun takes the form Nである／だった／であった. そのうえ is used at the beginning of a sentence or a clause, as seen in (6).</div></body></html>