<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>たとえ</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0391.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【だといって】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0393.xhtml">【たとえば】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x31911">【たとえ】</h1><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>たとえその<ruby><rb>事実</rb><rt>じ じつ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>知</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>っていたところで、<ruby><rb>私</rb><rt>わたし</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>気持</rb><rt>き も</rt></ruby>ちは<ruby><rb>変</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>わらなかっただろう。</span>／<span class="translation">Even if I’d known the truth, my feelings wouldn’t have changed.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>たとえ<ruby><rb>子</rb><rt>こ</rt></ruby>どもでもやったことの<ruby><rb>責任</rb><rt>せき にん</rt></ruby>はとらなくてはいけない。</span>／<span class="translation">Even a child has to take responsibility for what he or she has done.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>たとえどんなところに<ruby><rb>住</rb><rt>す</rt></ruby>もうとも、<ruby><rb>家族</rb><rt>か ぞく</rt></ruby>がいればいい。</span>／<span class="translation">It doesn’t matter where I live, as long as my family is there.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span>たとえ<ruby><rb>大金</rb><rt>たい きん</rt></ruby>をつまれたとしてもそんな<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>はやりたくない。</span>／<span class="translation">I wouldn’t want to do a job like that for all the money in the world.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “even supposing that, even if....” たとえ is followed by expressions of concession, such as ても, とも, たところで and としても. 住もうとも in (3) is the written language equivalent of 住んだとしても.</div></body></html>