<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>いざしらず</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0041.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【いささか】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0043.xhtml">【いじょう】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x4425">【いざしらず】</h1><h4 class="info">［Nはいざしらず］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>昔</rb><rt>むかし</rt></ruby>はいざしらず、<ruby><rb>今</rb><rt>いま</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>会社</rb><rt>かい しゃ</rt></ruby>を 10 も<ruby><rb>持</rb><rt>も</rt></ruby>つ<ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>だい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>実業家</rb><rt>じつ ぎょう か</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">I don’t know about his past, but now he is a business magnate who has ten companies. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>両親</rb><rt>りょう しん</rt></ruby>はいざしらず、<ruby><rb>我々</rb><rt>われ われ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>兄弟</rb><rt>きょう だい</rt></ruby>として<ruby><rb>妹</rb><rt>いもうと</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>結婚</rb><rt>けっ こん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>許</rb><rt>ゆる</rt></ruby>すわけにはいかない。</span>／<span class="translation">I don’t know what our parents think, but as her brothers we can’t allow our sister’s marriage. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>幼稚園</rb><rt>よう ち えん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>ならいざしらず、<ruby><rb>大学生</rb><rt>だい がく せい</rt></ruby>にもなって<ruby><rb>洗濯</rb><rt>せん たく</rt></ruby>もできないとは<ruby><rb>驚</rb><rt>おどろ</rt></ruby>いた。</span>／<span class="translation">I understand that a kindergarten child may not know how to do laundry, but I’m surprised that even a college student doesn’t know how.     </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>暇</rb><rt>ひま</rt></ruby>なときだったらいざしらず、こんなに<ruby><rb>忙</rb><rt>いそが</rt></ruby>しいときに<ruby><rb>客</rb><rt>きゃく</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>長居</rb><rt>なが い</rt></ruby>されてはたまらない。</span>／<span class="translation">When I have lots of time I don’t mind, but I can’t stand to have long-term guests at such a busy time.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>国内</rb><rt>こく ない</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>旅行</rb><rt>りょ こう</rt></ruby>ならいざしらず、<ruby><rb>海外旅行</rb><rt>かい がい りょ こう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>くとなると、<ruby><rb>準備</rb><rt>じゅん び</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>大変</rb><rt>たい へん</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">Maybe not on a domestic trip, but if you are going on an overseas trip, there will be lots of preparation. </span></div><div class="explanation"> Following a noun plus は, なら, or だったら, いざしらず means “I don’t know/care about such-and-such, but....” Before and after いざしらず there are contrastive pairs, such as “the past and the present,” “a kindergarten child and a college student,” or “free time and busy time.” It is used to express that the matter in the latter half is superior in degree or importance to, or is a special case of, the matter in the first half. In the latter half, an expression of astonishment or something like “it’s a problem” often follows. The expression in (1) is an idiomatic way to say “different from the past.”        </div></body></html>