<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>べき</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0917.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【べからず】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0919.xhtml">【べく】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x84961">【べき】</h1><h4 class="info">［N／Na　であるべき］</h4><h4 class="info">［A-くあるべき］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-るべき］</h4><div class="explanation">This is a conjugation of the literary auxiliary verb べし. It attaches to the dictionary form of verbs in modern usage. する becomes either するべき or すべき in form.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x84979"><span class="number">1. </span>...べきだ</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>学生</rb><rt>がく せい</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>勉強</rb><rt>べん きょう</rt></ruby>す（る）べきだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Students ought to study.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>他人</rb><rt>た にん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>私生活</rb><rt>し せい かつ</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>干渉</rb><rt>かん しょう</rt></ruby>す（る）べきではない。</span>／<span class="translation">You should not interfere with someone else’s private life.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>近頃</rb><rt>ちか ごろ</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>小学生</rb><rt>しょう がく せい</rt></ruby>まで<ruby><rb>塾</rb><rt>じゅく</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>通</rb><rt>かよ</rt></ruby>っているそうだが、<ruby><rb>子供</rb><rt>こ ども</rt></ruby>はもっと<ruby><rb>自由</rb><rt>じ ゆう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>遊</rb><rt>あそ</rt></ruby>ばせるべきだ。</span>／<span class="translation">I hear nowadays even primary school children attend cram schools, but I think children should have greater freedom just to play.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>女性</rb><rt>じょ せい</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>常</rb><rt>つね</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>化粧</rb><rt>け しょう</rt></ruby>をして<ruby><rb>美</rb><rt>うつく</rt></ruby>しくあるべきだなどという<ruby><rb>考</rb><rt>かんが</rt></ruby>えには<ruby><rb>賛成</rb><rt>さん せい</rt></ruby>できない。</span>／<span class="translation">I cannot agree with the idea that women should always be made up and look pretty.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>地球的</rb><rt>ち きゅう てき</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>規模</rb><rt>き ぼ</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>自然破壊</rb><rt>し ぜん は かい</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>進</rb><rt>すす</rt></ruby>んでいる。<ruby><rb>人間</rb><rt>にん げん</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>自然</rb><rt>し ぜん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>対</rb><rt>たい</rt></ruby>してもっと<ruby><rb>謙虚</rb><rt>けん きょ</rt></ruby>であるべきだ。</span>／<span class="translation">Ecological destruction is progressing on a global scale. People ought to be more thoughtful about nature.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（6）</span><ruby><rb>教師</rb><rt>きょう し</rt></ruby>: <ruby><rb>君</rb><rt>きみ</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>成績</rb><rt>せい せき</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>良</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>くないね。もっと<ruby><rb>勉強</rb><rt>べん きょう</rt></ruby>するべきだね。</span>／<span class="translation">Teacher:  Your academic record is not good. You ought to study harder.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><ruby><rb>学生</rb><rt>がく せい</rt></ruby>: すみません。</span>／<span class="translation">Student:  Sorry.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（7）</span><span class="number">A:</span><ruby><rb>海外</rb><rt>かい がい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>研修</rb><rt>けんしゅう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>くかどうか<ruby><rb>迷</rb><rt>まよ</rt></ruby>っているんだ。</span>／<span class="translation">I am debating whether I should go on an overseas study tour.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>そりゃ、<ruby><rb>行</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>くべきだよ。いいチャンスじゃないか。</span>／<span class="translation">You should go! It is a good opportunity, isn’t it?</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（8）</span>この<ruby><rb>仕事</rb><rt>し ごと</rt></ruby>はきみがやるべきだ。</span>／<span class="translation">You should do this job.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（9）</span><ruby><rb>会社</rb><rt>かい しゃ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>電話</rb><rt>でん わ</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>私用</rb><rt>し よう</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>電話</rb><rt>でん わ</rt></ruby>をするべきじゃないね。</span>／<span class="translation">You shouldn’t be making personal calls on the company telephone, you know.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means that “it should be done,” “it is proper to do ...,” or “... must be done.” The negative form is べきではない meaning “it is not good to do ...” or “doing ... is not appropriate” or “must not do ....”</div><div class="explanation">In (1)-(5), the speaker is expressing his view on general matters. If used in relation to the actions of another, it becomes advice for or against doing something, prohibition, or an order. This expression is used in both spoken and written language.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x85076"><span class="number">2. </span>...べき　だった／ではなかった</h2><h4 class="info">［V-る／V-ておく　べきだった］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>あの<ruby><rb>時</rb><rt>とき</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>買</rb><rt>か</rt></ruby>っておくべきだった。</span>／<span class="translation">I should have bought it then.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>あんなひどいことを<ruby><rb>言</rb><rt>い</rt></ruby>うべきではなかった。</span>／<span class="translation">I shouldn’t have said such a nasty thing!</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span><ruby><rb>君</rb><rt>きみ</rt></ruby>はやっぱりあのときに<ruby><rb>留学</rb><rt>りゅう がく</rt></ruby>しておくべきだったんだよ。</span>／<span class="translation">In hindsight, you should have gone abroad to study then.</span></div><div class="explanation">Indicates one’s regrets over an action one took or didn’t take and means “I wish I had done ...” or “I wish I hadn’t done ....”</div><div class="explanation">(1) means that the speaker wished he had bought it then but he did not. (2) means that the speaker wished he had not said something unkind but in reality, he did. In (3), the speaker is saying to his friend that he should have gone abroad to study. When the speaker talks about himself, it shows his regrets or remorse. This expression is often used in both everyday written and spoken language.</div><h2 class="subtitle spaceBefore" id="idsubtitlex1x85118"><span class="number">3. </span>...べきN</h2><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>外交</rb><rt>がいこう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>政策</rb><rt>せいさく</rt></ruby>について、<ruby><rb>議論</rb><rt>ぎ ろん</rt></ruby>すべきことは<ruby><rb>多</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>い。</span>／<span class="translation">With regard to the diplomatic policies, there are many issues that need to be discussed.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>エジプトのピラミッドは、<ruby><rb>永遠</rb><rt>えい えん</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>残</rb><rt>のこ</rt></ruby>すべき<ruby><rb>人類</rb><rt>じん るい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>遺産</rb><rt>い さん</rt></ruby>である。</span>／<span class="translation">The pyramids of Egypt are a world legacy that should be protected for future generations forever.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>エイズは<ruby><rb>恐</rb><rt>おそ</rt></ruby>るべき<ruby><rb>速</rb><rt>はや</rt></ruby>さで<ruby><rb>世界中</rb><rt>せ かい じゅう</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>広</rb><rt>ひろ</rt></ruby>がっている。</span>／<span class="translation">AIDS is spreading around the world at a fearful speed.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>皆</rb><rt>みな</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>死</rb><rt>し</rt></ruby>すべき<ruby><rb>運命</rb><rt>うん めい</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>背負</rb><rt>せ お</rt></ruby>っている。</span>／<span class="translation">Everyone is fated to die.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “something that has to be done” or “the inevitable consequence.”</div><div class="explanation">(1) indicates what has to be discussed as an important issue. (2) means that a world heritage should be maintained as a matter of course and should be passed on to the future generations. (3) and (4) are idiomatic phrases each meaning “incredible speed” and “unavoidable eventual death” respectively.</div><div class="explanation">A formal expression that is often used in written language.</div></body></html>