<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>そこへいくと</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0328.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【そこへ】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0330.xhtml">【そしたら】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x26286">【そこへいくと】</h1><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><span class="number">A:</span>うちの<ruby><rb>会社</rb><rt>かい しゃ</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>残業</rb><rt>ざん ぎょう</rt></ruby>が<ruby><rb>多</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>くてね。<ruby><rb>先週</rb><rt>せん しゅう</rt></ruby>はほとんど<ruby><rb>晩</rb><rt>ばん</rt></ruby>ご<ruby><rb>飯</rb><rt>はん</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>家</rb><rt>いえ</rt></ruby>で<ruby><rb>食</rb><rt>た</rt></ruby>べていないんだ。</span>／<span class="translation">In my company, you know, there’s a lot of overtime work. Last week I hardly ate supper at home at all.</span></div><div class="example talk"><span class="original"><span class="seigo"></span><span class="number">B:</span>そりゃ、<ruby><rb>大変</rb><rt>たい へん</rt></ruby>だな。そこへいくと<ruby><rb>僕</rb><rt>ぼく</rt></ruby>のとこなんか<ruby><rb>楽</rb><rt>らく</rt></ruby>なほうだ。</span>／<span class="translation">That’s tough. If you look at it that way, my company isn’t too bad.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>お<ruby><rb>宅</rb><rt>たく</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>坊</rb><rt>ぼ</rt></ruby>っちゃん、よくお<ruby><rb>出来</rb><rt>で き</rt></ruby>になるそうですね。そこへいくとうちの<ruby><rb>坊主</rb><rt>ぼう ず</rt></ruby>なんかまったくだめですよ。</span>／<span class="translation">I hear your son does very well in school. My boy, in comparison, is completely hopeless.</span></div><div class="explanation">Means “in comparison to.” Often followed by expressions of comparison. Used in spoken language.</div></body></html>