<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>にさいして</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0778.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【にさいし】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0780.xhtml">【にさきだち】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x71256">【にさいして】</h1><h4 class="info">［Nにさいして］</h4><h4 class="info">［V-るにさいして］</h4><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span>お<ruby><rb>別</rb><rt>わか</rt></ruby>れに<ruby><rb>際</rb><rt>さい</rt></ruby>して<ruby><rb>一言</rb><rt>ひと こと</rt></ruby>ご<ruby><rb>挨拶</rb><rt>あい さつ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>申</rb><rt>もう</rt></ruby>し<ruby><rb>上</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>げます。</span>／<span class="translation">Upon the occasion of parting, I would like to say a few words.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span><ruby><rb>今回</rb><rt>こん かい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>初来日</rb><rt>はつ らい にち</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>際</rb><rt>さい</rt></ruby>して、<ruby><rb>大統領</rb><rt>だい とう りょう</rt></ruby>は<ruby><rb>通商</rb><rt>つう しょう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>代表団</rb><rt>だい ひょう だん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>伴</rb><rt>ともな</rt></ruby>ってきた。</span>／<span class="translation">On this first visit to Japan, the President has come with a team of business representatives.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>この<ruby><rb>度</rb><rt>たび</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>大規模</rb><rt>だい き ぼ</rt></ruby>なアジア<ruby><rb>現代</rb><rt>げん だい</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>美術展</rb><rt>び じゅつ てん</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>開催</rb><rt>かい さい</rt></ruby>するに<ruby><rb>際</rb><rt>さい</rt></ruby>して、<ruby><rb>各国</rb><rt>かっ こく</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>多数</rb><rt>た すう</rt></ruby>のアーティストの<ruby><rb>協力</rb><rt>きょう りょく</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>参加</rb><rt>さん か</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>得</rb><rt>え</rt></ruby>られたことには<ruby><rb>大</rb><rt>おお</rt></ruby>きな<ruby><rb>意義</rb><rt>い ぎ</rt></ruby>がある。</span>／<span class="translation">On the opening of this large-scale exhibition of modern Asian art, it is of great significance that we have been supported by the cooperation and participation of many artists from various countries.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>長年</rb><rt>なが ねん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>懸案</rb><rt>けん あん</rt></ruby>であった<ruby><rb>平和条約</rb><rt>へい わ じょう やく</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>締結</rb><rt>てい けつ</rt></ruby>するに<ruby><rb>際</rb><rt>さい</rt></ruby>して、<ruby><rb>両国</rb><rt>りょう こく</rt></ruby>はお<ruby><rb>互</rb><rt>たが</rt></ruby>いの<ruby><rb>歴史</rb><rt>れき し</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>認識</rb><rt>にん しき</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>深</rb><rt>ふか</rt></ruby>め<ruby><rb>合</rb><rt>あ</rt></ruby>う<ruby><rb>意義</rb><rt>い ぎ</rt></ruby>を<ruby><rb>改</rb><rt>あらた</rt></ruby>めて<ruby><rb>認識</rb><rt>にん しき</rt></ruby>すべきである。</span>／<span class="translation">At the conclusion of this peace treaty which has been pending for many years, both countries should recognize the significance of the deepening of our understanding of each other’s history. </span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>今回</rb><rt>こん かい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>会議</rb><rt>かい ぎ</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>参加</rb><rt>さん か</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>際</rb><rt>さい</rt></ruby>しての<ruby><rb>最大</rb><rt>さい だい</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>懸案</rb><rt>けん あん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>事項</rb><rt>じ こう</rt></ruby>はやはり<ruby><rb>安全</rb><rt>あん ぜん</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>保証</rb><rt>ほ しょう</rt></ruby><ruby><rb>問題</rb><rt>もん だい</rt></ruby>であろう。</span>／<span class="translation">The problem of the security pact is the most important item at this meeting in which we are participating.</span></div><div class="explanation">Expresses the meaning of “on some occasion.” Becomes N/V-るにさいしてのN when modifying a noun. A formal, written expression.</div></body></html>