<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><html xml:lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"><head><meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/><link href="../Styles/style0001.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/><title>みるからに</title></head><body>
<div class="header">
    <a href="part0963.xhtml">&lt;&lt; 【みる】</a> |
    <a href="part0007.xhtml">Home</a> |
    <a href="part0965.xhtml">【むき】 &gt;&gt;</a>
</div>
<h1 class="title" id="idtitlex1x93669">【みるからに】</h1><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（1）</span><ruby><rb>部屋</rb><rt>へ や</rt></ruby>に<ruby><rb>入</rb><rt>はい</rt></ruby>ってきたのは、<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>るからに<ruby><rb>品</rb><rt>ひん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>良</rb><rt>よ</rt></ruby>い<ruby><rb>中年</rb><rt>ちゅう ねん</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>女性</rb><rt>じょ せい</rt></ruby>だった。</span>／<span class="translation">Entering the room was an elegant-looking middle-aged lady.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（2）</span>このコートは<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>るからに<ruby><rb>安物</rb><rt>やす もの</rt></ruby>だ。</span>／<span class="translation">This coat looks cheap.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（3）</span>あの<ruby><rb>人</rb><rt>ひと</rt></ruby>はいつも<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>るからに<ruby><rb>上等</rb><rt>じょう とう</rt></ruby>そうなものを<ruby><rb>着</rb><rt>き</rt></ruby>ている。</span>／<span class="translation">That person always looks like she’s wearing high-quality things.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（4）</span><ruby><rb>店</rb><rt>みせ</rt></ruby>の<ruby><rb>奥</rb><rt>おく</rt></ruby>から、<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>るからにやさしそうなおばあさんが<ruby><rb>出</rb><rt>で</rt></ruby>てきました。</span>／<span class="translation">A kind-looking old lady came out from inside the store.</span></div><div class="example"><span class="original"><span class="seigo">（5）</span><ruby><rb>通夜</rb><rt>つ や</rt></ruby>、<ruby><rb>葬式</rb><rt>そう しき</rt></ruby>と<ruby><rb>続</rb><rt>つづ</rt></ruby>いて、ふだんは<ruby><rb>元気</rb><rt>げん き</rt></ruby>な<ruby><rb>彼</rb><rt>かれ</rt></ruby>も<ruby><rb>見</rb><rt>み</rt></ruby>るからに<ruby><rb>疲</rb><rt>つか</rt></ruby>れたようすで<ruby><rb>座</rb><rt>すわ</rt></ruby>っていた。</span>／<span class="translation">What with the wake and the subsequent funeral, even the man you know as usually so full of pep sat down looking quite tired. </span></div><div class="explanation">Means to such an extent that it “can be ascertained easily from the external appearance of...” or “can be comprehended just by looking at....”</div></body></html>